TITLE: Bioinformatics analysis of capsid protein of different subtypes rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus.
YEAR: 2019
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s12917-019-2161-9
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/31775738

BackgroundRabbit Hemorrhagic Disease Virus (RHDV) belongs to the Caliciviridae family, is a highly lethal pathogen to rabbits. Increasing numbers of studies have demonstrated the existence of antigenic variation in RHDV, leading to the emergence of a new RHDV isolate (RHDVb). However, the underlying factors determining the emergence of the new RHDV and its unpredictable epidemiology remain unclear. To investigate these issues, we selected more than 184 partial and/or complete genome sequences of RHDV from GenBank and analyzed their phylogenetic relationships, divergence, and predicted protein modification sites.ResultsPhylogenetic analysis showed that classic RHDV isolates, RHDVa, and RHDVb formed different clades. It's interesting to note that RHDVa being more closely related to classic RHDV than RHDVb, while RHDVb had a closer genetic relationship to Rabbit Calicivirus (RCV) than to classic RHDV isolates. Moreover, divergence analysis suggested that the accumulation of amino acid (aa) changes might be a consequence of adaptive diversification of capsid protein (VP60) during the division between classical RHDV, RHDVa, RHDVb, and RCV. Notably, the prediction of N-glycosylation sites suggested that RHDVb subtypes had two unique N-glycosylation sites (aa 301, 362) but lacked three other N-glycosylation sites (aa 45, 308, 474) displayed in classic RHDV and RHDVa VP60 implying this divergence of N-glycosylation sites in RHDV might affect viral virulence. Analysis of phosphorylation sites also indicated that some phosphorylation sites in RHDVa and RHDVb differed from those in classic RHDV, potentially related to antigenic variation in RHDV.ConclusionThe genetic relationship between RHDVb and RCV was closer than classic RHDV isolates. Moreover, compared to RHDV and RHDVa, RHDVb had two unique N-glycosylation sites but lacked three sites, which might affect the virulence of RHDV. These results may provide new clues for further investigations of the origin of new types of RHDV and the mechanisms of genetic variation in RHDV.