TITLE: Immune cell pathology in rabbit hemorrhagic disease.
YEAR: 2019
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.14202/vetworld.2019.1332-1340
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/31641316

AimThe aim of this research was to study the effect of rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) on the host immune response by examining the cellular composition/pathology of lymphoid organs and serum levels of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) and interferon-gamma (IFN-γ).Materials and methodsNine adult rabbits were inoculated with 1 ml of 10% infected liver homogenate, and three rabbits served as controls. The rabbit hemorrhagic disease (RHD)-induced animals were studied on 3 consecutive days post-infection. Diagnosis of RHD was made through routine hemagglutination tests and the polymerase chain reaction. Blood smears and tissue samples from bone marrow (BM), spleen, lymph nodes, and liver were analyzed for cell composition and cytopathology. Serum levels of TNF-α and IFN-γ were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.ResultsRHD showed a decreased absolute cell count of blood as well as lymph nodes, spleen, and BM cell populations with marked left shift. This was seen as a progressive rise in immature and blast cells. Quantitative cellular changes were accompanied by an increase in specific inflammatory cytokines. Immunocytopathological alterations were evidenced by: Vacuolized, hyperactivated tissue macrophages, finding of Döhle bodies in neutrophils, and activated lymphocytes with increased nuclear-cytoplasmic ratio. Cytoplasmic eosinophilic viral inclusions found in tissue (liver, spleen, and BM) macrophages were shown for the 1st time in RHD. Megakaryocytic emperipolesis was a common feature of RHD.ConclusionThese studies suggest that RHDV induces pathology in leukocytes due to hyperactivation with left shift (toward immature stages of the different cell lineages). Macrophages are increased in number and show an expressed cytopathic effect often accompanied by viral eosinophilic cytoplasmic inclusions. They also developed a secretory activation (increased levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines).