TITLE: Oxidative Effects of Potassium Dichromate on Biochemical, Hematological Characteristics, and Hormonal Levels in Rabbit Doe (Oryctolagus cuniculus).
YEAR: 2019
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/vetsci6010030
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/30889790

The present study was conducted to evaluate the toxicity induced by the increasing doses of potassium dichromate in rabbit doe. Twenty-eight adult does of 6 months of age were divided into four groups (A, B, C, and D; n = 7), with comparable average body weight (bw). Group A rabbits received only distilled water daily and served as a control, while groups B, C, and D received, respectively, 10 mg/kg bw, 20 mg/ kg bw, and 40 mg/kg bw of potassium dichromate via gavage for 28 days, after which animals were anesthetized with ether vapor and sacrificed. Blood samples were obtained via cardiac puncture and collected without anticoagulant for biochemical dosages and with anticoagulant (EDTA) for complete blood count. Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and estradiol (E2) were dosed in serum and in homogenates of ovary with the help of AccuDiagTM ELISA kits from OMEGA DIAGNOSTICS LTD (Scotland, England) while respecting the immuno-enzymatic method. Activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione (GSH), catalase (CAT), and concentration of malondialdehyde (MDA) in liver, kidney, ovary and uterus were measured. Hematology revealed a significant (p p p > 0.05) difference was registered in monocytes, red blood cells, hematocrits, and plaquetocrits values with respect to the control. No matter the organ considered, no significant (p > 0.05) change was recorded in weight and volume. Nephrotoxicity analysis registered a significant (p p p > 0.05) variation in aspartate aminotransferase but total protein, alanine aminotransferase, and total cholesterol increased significantly (p p p p > 0.05) difference in glutathione reductase except in ovary where a significant (p p p > 0.05) change. Superoxide dismutase and malondialdehyde recorded a significant (p < 0.05) decrease and increase respectively, with respect to the control. Results obtained from this study showed that the reduction process of chromium in tissues may cause the generation of reactive oxygen species, which are involved in hematoxic, nephrotoxic, hepatotoxic, and reproductive toxicity effects.