TITLE: Rabbits transgenic for human IgG genes recapitulating rabbit B-cell biology to generate human antibodies of high specificity and affinity.
YEAR: 2020
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1080/19420862.2020.1846900
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/33228444

Transgenic animals incorporating human antibody genes are extremely attractive for drug development because they obviate subsequent antibody humanization procedures required for therapeutic translation. Transgenic platforms have previously been established using mice, but also more recently rats, chickens, and cows and are now in abundant use for drug development. However, rabbit-based antibody generation, with a strong track record for specificity and affinity, is able to include gene conversion mediated sequence diversification, thereby enhancing binder maturation and improving the variance/selection of output antibodies in a different way than in rodents. Since it additionally frequently permits good binder generation against antigens that are only weakly immunogenic in other organisms, it is a highly interesting species for therapeutic antibody generation. We report here on the generation, utilization, and analysis of the first transgenic rabbit strain for human antibody production. Through the knockout of endogenous IgM genes and the introduction of human immunoglobulin sequences, this rabbit strain has been engineered to generate a highly diverse human IgG antibody repertoire. We further incorporated human CD79a/b and Bcl2 (B-cell lymphoma 2) genes, which enhance B-cell receptor expression and B-cell survival. Following immunization against the angiogenic factor BMP9 (Bone Morphogenetic Proteins 9), we were able to isolate a set of exquisitely affine and specific neutralizing antibodies from these rabbits. Sequence analysis of these binders revealed that both somatic hypermutation and gene conversion are fully operational in this strain, without compromising the very high degree of humanness. This powerful new transgenic strategy will allow further expansion of the use of endogenous immune mechanisms in drug development.