TITLE: Single level posterolateral lumbar fusion in a New Zealand White rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) model: Surgical anatomy, operative technique, autograft fusion rates, and perioperative care.
YEAR: 2021
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1002/jsp2.1135
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/33778408

IntroductionThe posterolateral lumbar fusion (PLF) New Zealand White (NZW) (Oryctolagus cuniculus) rabbit model is a long-standing surgical technique for the preclinical evaluation of materials for spinal fusion. A detailed understanding of lumbar spine anatomy and perioperative care requirements of rabbits is imperative for correct execution of the model both scientifically and ethically. This study describes the preoperative procedures and surgical techniques used in single level PLF in a NZW rabbit model as it pertains to the animal husbandry, lumbar spine anatomy, anesthesia, surgical approach, and perioperative care of rabbits in a research setting.Materials and methodsWe describe the surgical technique and perioperative patient care for single level PLF in a NZW rabbit model. Medical records from a single research facility were retrospectively reviewed for adult NZW rabbits that underwent single level PLF (L4-L5) between January 2016 and December 2019. The number of lumbar vertebrae per rabbit, fusion rates at 12 weeks using iliac crest autograft and complications are reported. Skeletal maturity was confirmed by preoperative fluoroscopic and radiographic documented closure of hindlimb physes.ResultsThe PLF rabbit surgical model and perioperative patient care is described. PLF was performed in 868 adult female entire NZW rabbits. The majority of rabbits had seven lumbar vertebrae (620/868; 71.4%), followed by six (221/868; 25.5%), and eight (27/868; 3.1%). Fusion rates at 12 weeks for PLF using iliac crest autograft as assessed by manual palpation and radiographic assessment was 76.9% and 70.0%, respectively. Postoperative complications included occasional partial autograft site wound dehiscence due to self-trauma.ConclusionsFor PLF rabbit models, a detailed understanding of the surgical technique, rabbit lumbar anatomy including number of lumbar vertebrae, and dietary and husbandry requirements of rabbits, is essential for execution of the model and animal welfare.