TITLE: Alterations in the jejunal microbiota and fecal metabolite profiles of rabbits infected with Eimeria intestinalis.
YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s13071-022-05340-5
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/35754027

BackgroundRabbit coccidiosis is a major disease caused by various Eimeria species and causes enormous economic losses to the rabbit industry. Coccidia infection has a wide impact on the gut microbiota and intestinal biochemical equilibrium. In the present study, we established a model of Eimeria intestinalis infection in rabbits to evaluate the jejunal microbiota and fecal metabolite profiles.MethodsRabbits in the infected group were orally inoculated with 3 × 103 E. intestinalis oocysts. On the eighth day of infection, jejunal contents and feces were collected for 16S rRNA gene sequencing and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, respectively. Jejunum tissues were harvested for hematoxylin and eosin (H&E), periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), and immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining.ResultsHistopathological analysis showed that the whole jejunum was parasitized by E. intestinalis in a range of life cycle stages, and PAS staining showed that E. intestinalis infection caused extensive loss of goblet cells. IHC staining revealed that TNF-α expression was higher in the E. intestinalis infection group. Moreover, both the jejunal microbiota and metabolites significantly altered after E. intestinalis infection. At the genus level, the abundances of Escherichia and Enterococcus significantly increased in the infected group compared with the control group, while those of Oscillospira, Ruminococcus, Bacteroides, Akkermansia, Coprococcus, and Sarcina significantly decreased. In addition, 20 metabolites and two metabolic pathways were altered after E. intestinalis infection, and the major disrupted metabolic pathway was lipid metabolism.ConclusionsEimeria intestinalis infection induced intestinal inflammation and destroyed the intestinal homeostasis at the parasitized sites, leading to significant changes in the gut microbiota and subsequent corresponding changes in metabolites.