TITLE: Occurrence of Lagovirus europaeus (Rabbit Hemorrhagic Disease Virus) in Domestic Rabbits in Southwestern Poland in 2019: Case Report.
YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.02298-22
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/36445093

Lagovirus europaeus (rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus [RHDV]) is a small, nonenveloped, single-stranded RNA virus that causes a severe, highly infectious, and fatal disease in rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus) called rabbit hemorrhagic disease (RHD). Since its discovery in the 1980s, it has posed a very serious threat to the global rabbit industry and the rabbit population in the wild. According to data from 2005 to 2018, the occurrence of RHD has been reported or suspected in 50 countries, with more than one-half of the reports being recorded in European countries. The main aim of the study was to detect Lagovirus europaeus (RHDV) strains found in domestic rabbits that died suddenly in the city of Wrocław in southwest Poland. All animals (n = 14) tested in this study died naturally and showed macroscopic features at necropsy that indicated the possibility of death from RHD. As a result of the research, the presence of L. europaeus virus was confirmed in 8 samples of all 14 samples collected. All strains of Lagovirus europaeus isolated in the present study showed 100% nucleotide identity to L. europaeus GI.1 strain FRG and a strain isolated in New Zealand, as well as the L. europaeus GI.1a Erfurt strain. This suggests that it is likely that L. europaeus GI.2 strains have so far not displaced L. europaeus GI.1 strains from the environment in Poland. IMPORTANCE Lagovirus europaeus (RHDV) causes a severe, highly infectious, and fatal disease in rabbits called RHD. The disease is a very serious threat to the global rabbit industry and the rabbit population in the wild. The aim of the study was to detect Lagovirus europaeus (RHDV) strains in domestic rabbits that died suddenly in Poland. The presence of RHDV was confirmed in 8 samples of all 14 samples collected. This is one of the very few reports on the existence of this virus in pet rabbits in Poland.