TITLE: Effects of adrenaline and vasopressin on cerebral microcirculation at baseline and during global brain ischemia and reperfusion in rabbits.
YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s12871-022-01926-9
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/36476578

BackgroundDuring cardiopulmonary resuscitation, the brain becomes ischemic. Adrenaline and vasopressin have been recommended for use during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. We aimed to investigate the direct effects of adrenaline and vasopressin on the cerebral microvasculature at baseline and during ischemia and reperfusion in rabbits.MethodsThe closed cranial window method was used to visualize the cerebral microcirculation and changes in the pial arteriole diameter in rabbits. Adrenaline and vasopressin were administered topically on the brain tissue. First, the effects of adrenaline and vasopressin on pial arterioles were evaluated in 7 rabbits that were given 4 different concentrations of adrenaline, and another 7 rabbits that received 4 different concentrations of vasopressin. Second, the effects of adrenaline and vasopressin were determined during the global brain ischemia and reperfusion, which was induced by clamping the brachiocephalic, left common carotid, and left subclavian arteries for 15 min. An additional 21 rabbits were randomly assigned to receive artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) (n = 7), adrenaline 10-5 mol/L (n = 7), or vasopressin 10-7 mol/L (n = 7). Each drug was continuously infused from 5 min after the initiation of ischemia until 120 min after reperfusion. The pial arteriole diameters were recorded before and during ischemia, and after reperfusion.ResultsAt baseline, adrenaline and vasopressin did not affect the cerebral pial arterioles. During ischemia, vasopressin, but not aCSF and adrenaline constricted the pial vessels. Late in the reperfusion phase, pial diameter became reduced in the vasopressin and aCSF groups whereas pial diameter was higher in the animals treated with adrenaline.ConclusionsAdrenaline and vasopressin did not affect pial arterioles at baseline. During reperfusion, adrenaline may counteract the cerebral vasoconstriction.