TITLE: Nanofiber Fractionalization Stimulates Healing of Large Intestine Anastomoses in Rabbits.
YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.2147/ijn.s364888
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/36540375

BackgroundA current topic of ma jor interest in regenerative medicine is the development of novel materials for accelerated healing of sutures, and nanofibers seem to be suitable materials for this purpose. As various studies have shown, nanofibers are able to partially substitute missing extracellular matrix and to stimulate cell proliferation and differentiation in sutures. Therefore, we tested nanofibrous membranes and cryogenically fractionalized nanofibers as potential materials for support of the healing of intestinal anastomoses in a rabbit model.Materials and methodsWe compared cryogenically fractionalized chitosan and PVA nanofibers with chitosan and PVA nanofiber membranes designed for intestine anastomosis healing in a rabbit animal model. The anastomoses were biomechanically and histologically tested.ResultsIn strong contrast to nanofibrous membranes, the fractionalized nanofibers did show positive effects on the healing of intestinal anastomoses in rabbits. The fractionalized nanofibers were able to reach deep layers that are key to increased mechanical strength of the intestine. Moreover, fractionalized nanofibers led to the formation of collagen-rich 3D tissue significantly exceeding the healing effects of the 2D flat nanofiber membranes. In addition, the fractionalized chitosan nanofibers eliminated peritonitis, significantly stimulated anastomosis healing and led to a higher density of microvessels, in addition to a larger fraction of myofibroblasts and collagen type I and III. Biomechanical tests supported these histological findings.ConclusionWe concluded that the fractionalized chitosan nanofibers led to accelerated healing for rabbit colorectal anastomoses by the targeted stimulation of collagen-producing cells in the intestine, the smooth muscle cells and the fibroblasts. We believe that the collagen-producing cells were stimulated both directly due to the presence of a biocompatible scaffold providing cell adhesion, and indirectly, by a proper stimulation of immunocytes in the suture.