TITLE: Contribution to Bone Formation of the Schneiderian Membrane after Sinus Augmentation: A Histological Study in Rabbits.
YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/ma15228077
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/36431558

Aimto evaluate bone formation in close contact with the sinus mucosa after different periods from sinus augmentation and the influence on healing of the presence of an inward dis-placed bone window.Material and methodsEighteen rabbits were included in the experiment. A trap-door technique was applied at the test sites, and the bony window was elevated inward (inward window; IW) together with the sinus mucosa. At the control sites, the bony window was removed before the elevation of the sinus mucosa. The elevated space was filled with deproteinized bovine bone mineral (DBBM) and both access windows were covered with a collagen membrane. Histometric measurements were performed subjacent the sinus mucosa after 2, 4, and 8 weeks of healing.ResultsVery few sinuses presented small percentages of new bone in close contact with the sinus mucosa in the various period examined. The presence of bone in the neighbor areas might have influenced bone formation close to the sinus mucosa. The inward displaced bone window supported bone formation close to the sinus mucosa only in the earliest period of healing, while the bone walls increased their influence over time. The lack of increased new bone percentage over time in the most central regions of the elevated sinus mucosa do not support the hypothesis that the sinus mucosa may express its potential in bone formation. It can be speculated that the new bone found in the intermediate and middle regions of the control sites in the earliest period of healing might be due to residual of bone from the osteotomy.ConclusionsVery small amounts of new bone were found subjacent to the sinus mucosa, mostly formed from the bone walls, the inward displaced bone window or from possible bone residues from the osteotomy procedures. The lack of increased new bone percentage over time in the most central regions of the elevated sinus mucosa indicates that the contribution to bone formation provided by the sinus mucosa is limited.