TITLE: Establishing a rabbit model of perianal fistulizing Crohn's disease.
YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3748/wjg.v28.i15.1536
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/35582134

BackgroundCrohn's disease (CD) is a chronic nonspecific intestinal inflammatory disease. The aetiology and pathogenesis of CD are still unclear. Anal fistula is the main complication of CD and is a difficult problem to solve at present. The main limitation of developing new therapies is bound up with the short of preclinical security and effectiveness data. Therefore, an ideal animal model is needed to establish persistent anal fistula and an inflamed rectal mucosa.AimTo improve the induction method of colitis and establish a reliable and reproducible perianal fistulizing Crohn's disease animal model to evaluate new treatment strategies.MethodsTwenty male New Zealand rabbits underwent rectal enema with different doses of 2,4,6-trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid to induce proctitis. Group A was treated with an improved equal interval small dose increasing method. The dosage of group B was constant. Seven days later, the rabbits underwent surgical creation of a transsphincteric fistula. Then, three rabbits were randomly selected from each group every 7 d to remove the seton from the fistula. The rabbits were examined by endoscopy every 7 days, and biopsy forceps were used to obtain tissue samples from the obvious colon lesions for histological analysis. The disease activity index (DAI), colonoscopy and histological scores were recorded. Perianal endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) was used to evaluate the healing of fistulas.ResultsExcept for the DAI score, the colonoscopy and histological scores in group A were significantly higher than those in group B (P th day after the removal of the seton, all animals had persistent lumens on EUS imaging, showing continuous full-thickness high signals. Histological inspection of the fistula showed acute and chronic inflammation, fibrosis, epithelialization and peripheral proctitis of the adjoining rectum.ConclusionThe improved method of CD colitis induction successfully established a rabbit perianal fistula CD preclinical model, which was confirmed by endoscopy and pathology.