TITLE: Characterization of technical skill progress in a standardized rabbit model for training in laparoscopic duodenal atresia repair.
YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1007/s00464-021-08530-x
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/33999254

BackgroundLaboratory skills training is an essential step before conducting minimally invasive surgery in clinical practice. Our main aim was to develop an animal model for training in clinically highly challenging laparoscopic duodenal atresia repair that could be useful in establishing a minimum number of repetitions to indicate safe performance of similar interventions on humans.Materials and methodsA rabbit model of laparoscopic duodenum atresia surgery involving a diamond-shaped duodeno-duodenostomy was designed. This approach was tested in two groups of surgeons: in a beginner group without any previous clinical laparoscopic experience (but having undergone previous standardized dry-lab training, n = 8) and in an advanced group comprising pediatric surgery fellows with previous clinical experience of laparoscopy (n = 7). Each participant performed eight interventions. Surgical time, expert assessment using the Global Operative Assessment of Laparoscopic Skills (GOALS) score, anastomosis quality (leakage) and results from participant feedback questionnaires were analyzed.ResultsParticipants in both groups successfully completed all eight surgeries. The surgical time gradually improved in both groups, but it was typically shorter in the advanced group than in the beginner group. The leakage rate was significantly lower in the advanced group in the first two interventions, and it reached its optimal level after five operations in both groups. The GOALS and participant feedback scores showed gradual increases, evident even after the fifth surgery.ConclusionsOur data confirm the feasibility of this advanced pediatric laparoscopic model. Surgical time, anastomosis quality, GOALS score and self-assessment parameters adequately quantify technical improvement among the participants. Anastomosis quality reaches its optimal value after the fifth operation even in novice, but uniformly trained surgeons. A minimum number of wet-lab operations can be determined before surgery can be safely conducted in a clinical setting, where the development of further non-technical skills is also required.