TITLE: Evolution of the vls Antigenic Variability Locus of the Lyme Disease Pathogen and Development of Recombinant Monoclonal Antibodies Targeting Conserved VlsE Epitopes.
YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1128/spectrum.01743-22
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/36150043

VlsE (variable major protein-like sequence, expressed) is an outer surface protein of the Lyme disease pathogen (Borreliella species) responsible for its within-host antigenic variation and a key diagnostic biomarker of Lyme disease. However, the high sequence variability of VlsE poses a challenge to the development of consistent VlsE-based diagnostics and therapeutics. In addition, the standard diagnostic protocols detect immunoglobins elicited by the Lyme pathogen, not the presence of the pathogen or its derived antigens. Here, we described the development of recombinant monoclonal antibodies (rMAbs) that bound specifically to conserved epitopes on VlsE. We first quantified amino-acid sequence variability encoded by the vls genes from 13 B. burgdorferi genomes by evolutionary analyses. We showed broad inconsistencies of the sequence phylogeny with the genome phylogeny, indicating rapid gene duplications, losses, and recombination at the vls locus. To identify conserved epitopes, we synthesized peptides representing five long conserved invariant regions (IRs) on VlsE. We tested the antigenicity of these five IR peptides using sera from three mammalian host species including human patients, the natural reservoir white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), and VlsE-immunized New Zealand rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus). The IR4 and IR6 peptides emerged as the most antigenic and reacted strongly with both the human and rabbit sera, while all IR peptides reacted poorly with sera from natural hosts. Four rMAbs binding specifically to the IR4 and IR6 peptides were identified, cloned, and purified. Given their specific recognition of the conserved epitopes on VlsE, these IR-specific rMAbs are potential novel diagnostic and research agents for direct detection of Lyme disease pathogens regardless of strain heterogeneity. IMPORTANCE Current diagnostic protocols of Lyme disease indirectly detect the presence of antibodies produced by the patient upon infection by the bacterial pathogen, not the pathogen itself. These diagnostic tests tend to underestimate early-stage bacterial infections before the patients develop robust immune responses. Further, the indirect tests do not distinguish between active or past infections by the Lyme disease bacteria in a patient sample. Here, we described novel monoclonal antibodies that have the potential to become the basis of direct and definitive diagnostic detection of the Lyme disease pathogen, regardless of its genetic heterogeneity.