TITLE: Auricular cartilage regeneration using different types of mesenchymal stem cells in rabbits.
YEAR: 2022
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s40659-022-00408-z
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/36572914

BackgroundCartilaginous disorders comprise a wide range of diseases that affect normal joint movement, ear and nose shape; and they have great social and economic impact. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) provide a promising regeneration alternative for treatment of degenerative cartilaginous disorders. This study aimed to compare therapeutic potential of different types of laser activated MSCs to promote auricular cartilage regeneration. Twelve adult rabbit allocated equally in four groups, all animals received a surgical mid auricular cartilage defect in one ear; Group I (Positive control) injected sub-perichondrially with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), Group II (ADMSC-transplanted group) injected adipose-derived MSCs (ADMSCs), Group III (BMMSCs-transplanted group) received bone marrow-derived MSCs (BMMSCs), and Group IV (EMSC-transplanted group) received ear MSCs (EMSCs) in the defected ear. The auricular defect was analyzed morphologically, histopathologically and immunohistochemically after 4 weeks. In addition, a quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to examine expression of the collagen type II (Col II) and aggrecan as cartilage growth factors.ResultsThe auricles of all treatments appeared completely healed with smooth surfaces and similar tissue color. Histopathologically, defective areas of control positive group, ADMSCs and EMSCs treated groups experienced a small area of immature cartilage. While BMMSCs treated group exhibited typical features of new cartilage formation with mature chondrocytes inside their lacunae and dense extracellular matrix (ECM). In addition, BMMSC treated group showed a positive reaction to Masson's trichrome and orcein stains. In contrary, control positive, ADMSC and EMSC groups revealed faint staining with Masson's trichrome and Orcein. Immunohistochemically, there was an intense positive S100 expression in BMMSCs (with a significant increase of area percentage + 21.89 (P ConclusionBMMSCs showed the highest chondrogenic potential compared to ADMSCs and EMSCs and should be considered the first choice in treatment of cartilaginous degenerative disorders.