TITLE: Counteract severe heat stress by including different forms of zinc in the rabbit bucks' diet.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-39928-3
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37563192

The harmful influences of global warming on rabbit reproduction and industry attract global attention. Zinc (Zn) is an important trace element with a wide list of functions in the male reproductive system. The aim of this study was to estimate the effects of different forms of zinc supplementation, as organic (Zn methionine), nano (nano Zn oxide) as indirect way to minimized it impact on environment, and inorganic (Zn sulphate) on physiological parameters, semen quality, anti-oxidative status, hormonal profiles of male rabbits subjected to server heat stress. Thirty-six V-line bucks (6-7 months old, 2842.29 ± 34.46 g weight) were randomly distributed to 4 groups, bucks in 1st group (control group, Con) fed basal diet without Zn supplementation, the 2nd, 3rd and 4th groups fed basial diet with 30 mg/kg of zinc methionine (Zn-Met), nano zinc oxide (ZnO-NPs), and zinc sulphate (Zn-S), respectively for a period of 10 weeks suffered from severe heat stress of environmental ambient temperature (over 32 of temperature humidity index, THI). Semen samples were collected and evaluated for volume, pH, motility, concentration, viability, initial fructose, and seminal plasma antioxidant concentration. Liver, kidney function, hormonal and antioxidant profile were measured in blood serum. The results revealed that, compared to control, all forms of Zn supplementation used significantly improved kidney function (creatinine), serum antioxidant (SOD and CAT), physiological parameters, especially on 1st month of the experiment, and seminal plasma antioxidant (SOD and CAT) of heat stressed bucks. Likewise, semen quality in terms of sperm concentration, sperm viability, and initial fructose enhanced significantly (P ≤ 0.05) by ZnO-NPs supplementation. Zinc methionine supplementation significantly improved liver function and decreased seminal plasma TBARs. Treatments with Zn-Met and ZnO-NPs increased seminal TAC and blood testosterone levels with reduced blood cortisol levels compared to other groups. Severe heat stress could be counteract by inclusion Zn with studied forms Zn-Met and ZnO-NPs at recommended dose (30 mg/kg diet) to improve semen quality and antioxidant status.