TITLE: Nanosecond pulsed electric field ablates rabbit VX2 liver tumors in a non-thermal manner.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0273754
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/36920938

BackgroundLiver tumor remains an important cause of cancer-related death. Nanosecond pulsed electric fields (nsPEFs) are advantageous in the treatment of melanoma and pancreatic cancer, but their therapeutic application on liver tumors need to be further studied.MethodsHep3B cells were treated with nsPEFs. The biological behaviors of cells were detected by Cell Counting Kit-8, 5-ethynyl-20-deoxyuridine, and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) assays. In vivo, rabbit VX2 liver tumor models were ablated by ultrasound-guided nsPEFs and radiofrequency ablation (RFA). Contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS) was used to evaluate the ablation effect. HE staining and Masson staining were used to evaluate the tissue morphology after ablation. Immunohistochemistry was performed to determine the expression of Ki67, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, and α-smooth muscle actin at different time points after ablation.ResultsThe cell viability of Hep3B cells was continuously lower than that of the control group within 3 days after pulse treatment. The proliferation of Hep3B cells was significantly affected by nsPEFs. TEM showed that Hep3B cells underwent significant morphological changes after pulse treatment. In vivo, CEUS imaging showed that nsPEFs could completely ablate model rabbit VX2 liver tumors. After nsPEFs ablation, the area of tumor fibrosis and the expression of Ki67, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, and α-smooth muscle actin were decreased. However, after RFA, rabbit VX2 liver tumor tissue showed complete necrosis, but the expression of PCNA and α-smooth muscle actin did not decrease compared to the tumor group.ConclusionsnsPEFs can induce Hep3B cells apoptosis and ablate rabbit VX2 liver tumors in a non-thermal manner versus RFA. The ultrasound contrast agent can monitor immediate effect of nsPEF ablation. This study provides a basis for the clinical study of nsPEFs ablation of liver cancer.