TITLE: Twelve-Month Clinical and Histopathological Performance of a Novel Synthetic Cornea Device in Rabbit Model.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1167/tvst.12.8.9
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37561510

PurposeTo report the biological stability and postoperative outcomes of a second-generation, single-piece, flexible synthetic cornea in a rabbit model.MethodsDevice materials and design were amended to enhance biointegration. Optic skirt design devices were made from compact perfluoroalkoxy alkane with porous expanded polytetrafluoroethylene ingrowth surface overlying the skirt and optic wall. Sixteen devices were implanted into intrastromal pocket in rabbit eyes. Rabbits were randomly assigned to 6- and 12-month follow-up cohorts (n = 8 in each) postoperatively. Monthly examinations and optical coherence tomography assessed cornea-device integration, iridocorneal angle, optic nerve, and retina.ResultsThere were no intraoperative complications. All devices were in situ at exit, with clear optics. No retroprosthetic membrane, glaucoma, cataract formation, or retinal detachment was observed. Two rabbits in the 6-month group had mild, focal anterior lamella thinning without retraction adjacent to the optic near tight sutures. Three postoperative complications occurred in the 12-month group. One rabbit diagnosed with endophthalmitis was euthanized on day 228. Mild sterile focal retraction of anterior lamella occurred in two rabbits, which were terminated on days 225 and 315. Light microscopic examination of enucleated globes demonstrated fibroplasia with new collagen deposition into the porous scaffold without significant inflammation, encapsulation, or granuloma formation.ConclusionsClinical evaluations, imaging, and histopathological findings indicate favorable outcomes of this synthetic corneal device in a rabbit model. Early feasibility studies in humans are being planned.Translational relevanceFavorable 12-month results of the device in rabbits demonstrate vision-restoring potential in corneally blind individuals at high risk of failure with donor keratoplasty.