TITLE: Residual periodontal ligament in the extraction socket promotes the dentin regeneration potential of DPSCs in the rabbit jaw.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s13287-023-03283-x
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/36941706

BackgroundBecause of the low regeneration efficiency and unclear underlying molecular mechanism, tooth regeneration applications are limited. In this study, we explored the influence of residual periodontal ligament on the dentin regeneration potential of dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) in the jaw.MethodsTo establish a tooth regeneration model, the incisors of New Zealand white rabbits were extracted while preserving residual periodontal ligament, followed by the implantation of DPSCs. After 3 months, micro-computed tomography (micro-CT), stereomicroscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were used to observe the volume, morphology and microstructure of regenerated tissue. Histological staining and immunostaining analyses were used to observe the morphological characteristics and expression of the dentin-specific proteins DMP1 and DSPP. To explore the mechanism, DPSCs and periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs) were cocultured in vitro, and RNA was collected from the DPSCs for RNA-seq and bioinformatic analysis.ResultsThe results of micro-CT and stereomicroscopy showed that the number of sites with regeneration and the volume of regenerated tissue in the DPSCs/PDL group (6/8, 1.07 ± 0.93 cm3) were larger than those in the DPSCs group (3/8, 0.23 ± 0.41 cm3). The results of SEM showed that the regenerated dentin-like tissue in the DPSCs and DPSCs/PDL groups contained dentin tubules. Haematoxylin and eosin staining and immunohistochemical staining indicated that compared with the DPSCs group, the DPSCs/PDL group showed more regular regenerated tissue and higher expression levels of the dentin-specific proteins DMP1 and DSPP (DMP1: P = 0.02, DSPP: P = 0.01). RNA-seq showed that the coculture of DPSCs with PDLSCs resulted in the DPSCs differentially expressing 427 mRNAs (285 upregulated and 142 downregulated), 41 lncRNAs (26 upregulated and 15 downregulated), 411 circRNAs (224 upregulated and 187 downregulated), and 19 miRNAs (13 upregulated and 5 downregulated). Bioinformatic analysis revealed related Gene Ontology function and signalling pathways, including extracellular matrix (ECM), tumour necrosis factor (TNF) signalling and chemokine signalling pathways.ConclusionsResidual periodontal ligament in the extraction socket promotes the dentin regeneration potential of DPSCs in the jaw. RNA-seq and bioinformatic analysis revealed that ECM, TNF signalling and chemokine signalling pathways may represent the key factors and signalling pathways.