TITLE: Effects of endozoochory and diploendozoochory by captive wild mammals on Juniperus deppeana seeds.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1002/ece3.10262
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37408625

Carnivorous mammals disperse seeds through endozoochory and diploendozoochory. The former consists of ingestion of the fruit, passage through the digestive tract, and expulsion of the seeds, a process that allows scarification and dispersal of the seeds over long or short distances. The latter is typical of predators that expel seeds that were contained in the prey and the effects of which may differ from those of endozoochory with respect to the retention time of the seeds in the tracts, as well as their scarification and viability. The objective of this study was to conduct an experimental evaluation comparing the capacity of each mammal species in terms of the dispersal of Juniperus deppeana seeds and, at the same time, to compare this capacity through the two dispersal systems: endozoochory and diploendozoochory. We measured dispersal capacity using indices of recovery, viability, changes in testas, and retention time of seeds in the digestive tract. Juniperus deppeana fruits were collected in the Sierra Fría Protected Natural Area in Aguascalientes, Mexico, and were administered in the diet of captive mammals: gray fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus), coati (Nasua narica) and domestic rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus). These three mammals represented the endozoochoric dispersers. For the diploendozoochoric treatment, seeds excreted by rabbits were incorporated into the diets of captive mammals: bobcat (Lynx rufus) and cougar (Puma concolor), in a local zoo. Seeds present in the scats were then collected, and recovery rates and retention times were estimated. Viability was estimated by X-ray optical densitometry and testa thicknesses were measured and surfaces checked using scanning electron microscopy. The results showed a recovery of seeds greater than 70% in all the animals. The retention time was p p p J. deppeana by maintaining viable seeds with adaptive characteristics in the testa to promote forest regeneration and restoration. In particular, feline predators can provide an ecosystem service through scarification and seed dispersal.