TITLE: Establishment of an ultrasound-guided protocol for the assessment of hip joint osteoarthritis in rabbits-A sonoanatomic study.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0291177
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37708238

Ultrasound (US) has emerged as one of the most applied imaging tools to diagnose musculoskeletal disorders and assist in guided intra-articular administrations. Nevertheless, in evaluating the rabbit hip joint, there is a need for an ultrasonographic approach. Therefore, this study aimed to describe the hip sonoanatomy, develop and validate a US-guided protocol to assess the hip joint in rabbits and apply this protocol in vivo. This study was carried out in three phases, phase I: a pilot cadaveric study, to assess the applicability of different US approaches in the hip of rabbits and, consequently, develop a detailed US-guided protocol (2 rabbit cadavers, n = 4 hips); phase II: validation of the established US-guided protocol through a numerical scoring system in healthy joints (11 rabbit cadavers, n = 22 hips), and, lastly, phase III: application of the US-guided protocol in vivo in osteoarthritic joints (5 rabbits, n = 5 hips). A total of six planes were validated, two in the ventral approach and four in the dorsal approach. The ventral transverse plane was deemed more informative regarding the hip joint sonoanatomy, enabling the identification of a greater number of structures when compared to the other planes. Nevertheless, this study suggested that the isolated application of a plane was deemed insufficient for a complete and detailed evaluation of the hip joint anatomy, rendering it necessary to employ other planes complementarily. Furthermore, the established US-guided protocol allowed a definitive diagnosis of OA, and osteophytes and capsular hypertrophy were among the defects most frequently detected. This novel study provided US anatomical landmarks for forthcoming therapeutic research and monitoring of OA development, granting the accurate identification of osseous and cartilaginous defects.