TITLE: Urotensin II Enhances Advanced Aortic Atherosclerosis Formation and Delays Plaque Regression in Hyperlipidemic Rabbits.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/ijms24043819
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/36835230

Accumulated evidence shows that elevated urotensin II (UII) levels are associated with cardiovascular diseases. However, the role of UII in the initiation, progression, and regression of atherosclerosis remains to be verified. Different stages of atherosclerosis were induced in rabbits by a 0.3% high cholesterol diet (HCD) feeding, and either UII (5.4 μg/kg/h) or saline was chronically infused via osmotic mini-pumps. UII promoted atherosclerotic fatty streak formation in ovariectomized female rabbits (34% increase in gross lesion and 93% increase in microscopic lesion), and in male rabbits (39% increase in gross lesion). UII infusion significantly increased the plaque size of the carotid and subclavian arteries (69% increase over the control). In addition, UII infusion significantly enhanced the development of coronary lesions by increasing plaque size and lumen stenosis. Histopathological analysis revealed that aortic lesions in the UII group were characterized by increasing lesional macrophages, lipid deposition, and intra-plaque neovessel formation. UII infusion also significantly delayed the regression of atherosclerosis in rabbits by increasing the intra-plaque macrophage ratio. Furthermore, UII treatment led to a significant increase in NOX2 and HIF-1α/VEGF-A expression accompanied by increased reactive oxygen species levels in cultured macrophages. Tubule formation assays showed that UII exerted a pro-angiogenic effect in cultured endothelial cell lines and this effect was partly inhibited by urantide, a UII receptor antagonist. These findings suggest that UII can accelerate aortic and coronary plaque formation and enhance aortic plaque vulnerability, but delay the regression of atherosclerosis. The role of UII on angiogenesis in the lesion may be involved in complex plaque development.