TITLE: Optimising the Delivery of RHDV to Rabbits for Biocontrol: An Experimental Evaluation of Two Novel Methods of Virus Delivery.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/v15091814
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37766220

Rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (RHDV) is established as a landscape-scale biocontrol that assists the management of invasive European rabbits and their impacts in both Australia and New Zealand. In addition to this, it is also available to land managers to augment rabbit control efforts at a local scale. However, current methods of deploying RHDV to rabbits that rely on the consumption of virus-treated baits can be problematic as rabbits are reluctant to consume bait when there is abundant, green, protein-rich feed available. We ran a suite of interrupted time-series experiments to compare the duration of infectivity of two conventional (carrot and oat baits) and two novel (meat bait and soil burrow spray) methods of deploying RHDV to rabbits. All methods effectively killed exposed rabbits. Soil burrow spray and carrot baits resulted in infection and mortality out to 5 days post their deployment in the field, and meat baits caused infection out to 10 days post their deployment. In contrast, oat baits continued to infect and kill exposed rabbits out to 20 days post deployment. Molecular assays demonstrated high viral loads in deployed baits beyond the duration for which they were infectious or lethal to rabbits. Based on our results, we suggest that the drying of meat baits may create a barrier to effective transmission of RHDV by adult flies within 10 days. We therefore hypothesise that fly larvae production and development on infected tissues is critical to prolonged viral transmission from meat baits, and similarly from carcasses of RHDV mortalities, via mechanical fly vectors. Our study demonstrates that meat baits and soil spray could provide additional virus deployment options that remove the need for rabbits to consume baits at times when they are reluctant to do so.