TITLE: Acupotomy Improves Synovial Hypoxia, Synovitis and Angiogenesis in KOA Rabbits.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.2147/jpr.s396955
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/36919160

PurposeKnee osteoarthritis (KOA) is a chronic inflammatory disease highly associated with intra-articular hypertension, hypoxia and angiogenesis of synovial tissue. Our previous studies showed that acupotomy could treat KOA in a variety of ways, including reducing cartilage deterioration and enhancing biomechanical qualities. However, the mechanism of hypoxia and angiogenesis induced by acupotomy in KOA synovium remains unclear. This study looked for the benign intervention of acupotomy in synovial pathology.MethodsThe rabbits were divided into 3 groups, Normal group, KOA group, and KOA + Acupotomy (Apo) group, with 11 rabbits in each group. The KOA rabbit model was established by the modified Videman method with six weeks. The KOA + Apo group performed the intervention. The tendon insertion of vastus medialis, vastus lateralis, rectus femoris, biceps femoris, and anserine bursa were selected as treatment points in rabbits. Rabbits were treated once every 7 days for 3 weeks. We observed the intra-articular pressure and oxygen partial pressure (BOLD MRI). The synovial morphology was monitored by Hematoxylin-Eosin Staining (HE Staining). The expression of hypoxia-inducible transcription factor-1α (HIF-1α), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), interleukin-1β (IL-1β) and tumour necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) was detected using Immunohistochemical (IHC), Western Blot and Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA).ResultsAcupotomy reduced intra-articular hypertension and improved the synovial oxygen situation, synovial inflammatory and angiogenesis. HIF-1α, VEGF, IL-1β and TNF-α expression were downregulated by acupotomy.ConclusionAcupotomy may reduce inflammation and angiogenesis in KOA rabbit by reducing abnormally elevated intra-articular pressure and improving synovial oxygen environment. The above may provide a new theoretical foundation for acupotomy treatment of KOA.