TITLE: Normal bacterial flora of the oral cavity in healthy pet rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus).
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1002/vms3.1144
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37079702

BackgroundRabbits often suffer from dental disease, including dental abscesses and periodontal/apical infections. With odontogenic infection and abscessation, a bacterial aetiology can be proven by bacterial culture and identification. Although studies exist on the bacterial flora of dental abscesses, the information available to date on the bacterial flora of the oral cavity in healthy rabbits is limited.ObjectivesThis study aims to evaluate the cultivable bacterial flora in the oral cavity of healthy, young, pet rabbits and to compare this flora with the pathologic flora of odontogenic abscesses described in the literature.MethodsSamples were collected from the oral cavity of 33 healthy, young pet rabbits undergoing routine procedures. Oral cavity culture specimens were collected by rolling a sterile flocked paediatric swab in the mouth. Identification was first attempted by morphological assessment, Gram staining and mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF). Colonies that could not be identified by mass spectrometry were identified by amplification and molecular sequencing of a part of the 16s rRNA gene.ResultsBacteria were recovered from 100% of oral swabs; 220 isolates of 35 different genera of bacteria were cultured. The most frequently isolated bacteria were Streptococcus sp. (19.8%), Rothia sp. (17.9%), Enterobacter sp. (7%), Staphylococcus sp. (6.6%) and Actinomyces sp. (5.7%). Four phyla are represented: Proteobacteria (38.3%), Firmicutes (30.5%), Actinobacteria (26.9%) and Bacteroidota (4.3%).ConclusionsA wide range of commensal bacteria are present in the mouths of rabbits. Bacterial cultures taken from cases of dental abscesses often reveal bacteria. Streptococcus sp., Staphylococcus sp. and Actinomyces sp. are frequently found in cultures from dental abscesses, in contrast to Rothia and Enterobacter species. Our findings enhance the knowledge of rabbit microbial communities throughout oral cavity.