TITLE: Biomimetic vascularized adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells bone-periosteum graft enhances angiogenesis and osteogenesis in a male rabbit spine fusion model.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1302/2046-3758.1212.bjr-2023-0013.r1
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38052231

AimsSeveral artificial bone grafts have been developed but fail to achieve anticipated osteogenesis due to their insufficient neovascularization capacity and periosteum support. This study aimed to develop a vascularized bone-periosteum construct (VBPC) to provide better angiogenesis and osteogenesis for bone regeneration.MethodsA total of 24 male New Zealand white rabbits were divided into four groups according to the experimental materials. Allogenic adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells (AMSCs) were cultured and seeded evenly in the collagen/chitosan sheet to form cell sheet as periosteum. Simultaneously, allogenic AMSCs were seeded onto alginate beads and were cultured to differentiate to endothelial-like cells to form vascularized bone construct (VBC). The cell sheet was wrapped onto VBC to create a vascularized bone-periosteum construct (VBPC). Four different experimental materials - acellular construct, VBC, non-vascularized bone-periosteum construct, and VBPC - were then implanted in bilateral L4-L5 intertransverse space. At 12 weeks post-surgery, the bone-forming capacities were determined by CT, biomechanical testing, histology, and immunohistochemistry staining analyses.ResultsAt 12 weeks, the VBPC group significantly increased new bone formation volume compared with the other groups. Biomechanical testing demonstrated higher torque strength in the VBPC group. Notably, the haematoxylin and eosin, Masson's trichrome, and immunohistochemistry-stained histological results revealed that VBPC promoted neovascularization and new bone formation in the spine fusion areas.ConclusionThe tissue-engineered VBPC showed great capability in promoting angiogenesis and osteogenesis in vivo. It may provide a novel approach to create a superior blood supply and nutritional environment to overcome the deficits of current artificial bone graft substitutes.