TITLE: Implants Placed with a Ring Technique Using Inlay and Onlay Block Xenografts in the Mandible of Rabbits.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/ma16237490
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38068234

BackgroundXenogenous bone has been proposed as an alternative to overcome the disadvantages of autogenous grafting. The aim of the present study was to study bone dynamics at inlay and onlay xenografts used for bone augmentation applying a ring technique.MethodsThe bone at the lateral surface of the mandibular angle of 12 adult male New Zealand White rabbits was exposed bilaterally. The cortical layer received multiple perforations on one side of the mandible, and a xenograft block of collagenated cancellous equine bone, 7 mm in diameter and 3 mm in width, was fixed on the prepared surface using an implant (onlay group). On the opposite side, a defect 7 mm in diameter and 3 mm in depth was prepared, and the xenograft block was adapted to the defect and fixed with an implant (inlay group).ResultsAfter ten weeks of healing, in the onlay grafts, new bone was mainly formed on the trabeculae surface, reaching in some specimens the most coronal regions of the block. In the inlay grafts, new bone was found arranged on the trabecular surfaces but also occupying the spaces among the trabeculae. The entrance of the defect was often found close to the top of the block by newly formed bone. A higher percentage of new bone was found in the inlay (19.0 ± 9.3%) compared to the onlay (10.4 ± 7.4%) groups (p = 0.031). The mean gain in osseointegration at the implant in relation to the base of the original 3 mm deep defect was 0.95 ± 1.05% in the onlay group and 0.78 ± 0.71% in the inlay group (p = 0.603).ConclusionThe inlay grafts exhibited a higher new bone percentage than the onlay block grafts possibly due to the defect conformation that presented more sources for bone growth. The trabecular conformation and the composition of the grafts made possible the expression of the osteoconductive properties of the material used. This resulted, in several specimens, in the growth of bone on the graft trabeculae toward the most superior regions in both groups and in the closure of the coronal entrance of the defects in the inlay group. The clinical relevance of this experiment is that the ring technique applied as an inlay method could be suitable for bone augmentation.