TITLE: Cobalt Iron Oxide (CoFe2O4) Nanoparticles Induced Toxicity in Rabbits.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/vetsci10080514
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37624302

The market for nanoparticles has grown significantly over the past few decades due to a number of unique qualities, including antibacterial capabilities. It is still unclear how nanoparticle toxicity works. In order to ascertain the toxicity of synthetic cobalt iron oxide (CoFe2O4) nanoparticles (CIONPs) in rabbits, this study was carried out. Sixteen rabbits in total were purchased from the neighborhood market and divided into two groups (A and B), each of which contained eight rabbits. The CIONPs were synthesized by the co-precipitation method. Crystallinity and phase identification were confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The average size of the nanoparticles (13.2 nm) was calculated by Scherrer formula (Dhkl = 0.9 λ/β cos θ) and confirmed by TEM images. The saturation magnetization, 50.1 emug-1, was measured by vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM). CIONPs were investigated as contrast agents (CA) for magnetic resonance images (MRI). The relaxivity (r = 1/T) of the MRI was also investigated at a field strength of 0.35 T (Tesla), and the ratio r2/r1 for the CIONPs contrast agent was 6.63. The CIONPs were administrated intravenously into the rabbits through the ear vein. Blood was collected at days 5 and 10 post-exposure for hematological and serum biochemistry analyses. The intensities of the signal experienced by CA with CIONPs were 1427 for the liver and 1702 for the spleen. The treated group showed significantly lower hematological parameters, but significantly higher total white blood cell counts and neutrophils. The results of the serum biochemistry analyses showed significantly higher and lower quantities of different serum biochemical parameters in the treated rabbits at day 10 of the trial. At the microscopic level, different histological ailments were observed in the visceral organs of treated rabbits, including the liver, kidneys, spleen, heart, and brain. In conclusion, the results revealed that cobalt iron oxide (CoFe2O4) nanoparticles induced toxicity via alterations in multiple tissues of rabbits.