TITLE: The Effects of Prenatal Pravastatin Treatment in the Rabbit Fetal Growth Restriction Model.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/biomedicines11102685
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37893059

Fetal growth restriction (FGR) remains without an effective prenatal treatment. Evidence from murine FGR models suggests a beneficial effect of prenatal pravastatin. Since the rabbit hemodichorial placenta more closely resembles the human condition, we investigated the effects of prenatal maternal pravastatin administration in the rabbit FGR model. At a gestational age of 25 days (term 31d), pregnant dams underwent partial uteroplacental vessel ligation (UPVL) in one uterine horn to induce FGR, leaving the other horn as a control. Dams were randomized to either receive 5 mg/kg/d pravastatin dissolved in their drinking water or normal drinking water until delivery. At GA 30d, the rabbits were delivered and were divided into four groups: control without pravastatin (C/NoPrav), FGR without pravastatin (FGR/NoPrav), FGR with pravastatin (FGR/Prav), and controls with pravastatin (C/Prav). The newborn rabbits underwent pulmonary functional assessment and neurobehavioral assessment, and they were harvested for alveolar morphometry or neuropathology. The placentas underwent histology examination and RNA expression. Birth weight was lower in the FGR groups (FGR/Prav, FGR/NoPrav), but there was no difference between FGR/Prav and C/NoPrav. No differences were noted in placental zone proportions, but eNOS in FGR/Prav placentas and VEGFR-2 in FGR/Prav and C/Prav were upregulated. There were no differences in pulmonary function assessment and alveolar morphometry. FGR/Prav kittens had increased neurosensory scores, but there were no differences in neuromotor tests, neuron density, apoptosis, and astrogliosis. In conclusion, in the rabbit FGR model, pravastatin upregulated the expression of VEGFR-2 and eNOS in FGR placentas and was associated with higher neurosensory scores, without measurable effects on birthweight, pulmonary function and morphology, and neuron density.