TITLE: Effects of imidacloprid-contaminated feed exposure on spermatogenic cells and Leydig cells in testes of adult male rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus).
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1016/j.sjbs.2022.103541
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/36582499

This research was undertaken to assess the results of repeated exposure to the insecticide; imidacloprid (IMI)-contaminated feed on testicular tissue, spermatogenic cell population, Leydig cell number, and sperm morphology in adult male rabbits (n = 24). The treatment groups received IMI (Bildor® 100 mg/L water spray on green grass)-contaminated green grass without wash (n = 8, not-washed-feed rabbit group) and after wash (n = 8, washed-feed rabbit group) once daily for two weeks on an alternate day basis. The rest of the rabbits, as control, received a normal pesticide-free standard feed. During the exposure time, there was no evident toxic symptom found on regular monitoring of IMI-treated rabbits. Histopathologically, the thickness of tunica albuginea of testes reduced significantly with loosely arranged connective tissues in IMI-treated rabbits. Within the testes, the bizarre-shaped seminiferous tubules were seen with increased lumen diameter in IMI-treated rabbits. The spermatogenic cells were disorganized and detached from the basement membrane in seminiferous tubules of IMI-exposed testes of rabbits. The spermatogenic cell population decreased significantly (P < 0.05) in IMI-treated rabbits compared to control rabbits. Leydig cell number decreased significantly (P < 0.05) in IMI-treated rabbits. A high percentage of morphologically abnormal spermatozoa was seen in IMI-treated rabbits. The degree of the histopathological changes was more prominent in the testes of IMI-exposed not-washed-feed rabbits. The results showed that insecticide-IMI has toxicological effects on testicular tissues, mainly spermatogenic and Leydig cell population of adult rabbits which may cause infertility. A short running title: Effect of imidacloprid on testicular tissue of rabbits.