TITLE: Regenerative effects of platelet-rich plasma releasate injection in rabbit discs degenerated by intradiscal injection of condoliase.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s13075-023-03200-w
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37941067

BackgroundIntradiscal condoliase injection is an alternative therapeutic option for lumbar disc herniation (LDH). However, it is often associated with disc degeneration. Several in vivo studies have demonstrated the regenerative potential of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) in disc degeneration. Thus, we hypothesized that the intradiscal injection of PRP releasate (PRPr), a soluble releasate isolated from PRP, has the potential to regenerate degenerated intervertebral discs (IVDs) induced by condoliase. This study examined the regenerative effects of PRPr on rabbit IVDs degenerated following condoliase injection.MethodsEleven New Zealand white rabbits were used in this study. Condoliase (12.5 mU/10 μl) was injected into two non-contiguous discs (L2-L3 and L4-L5), and L3-L4 disc was left intact as a non-injection control. Saline (20 μl) or PRPr (20 μl) was randomly injected into L2-L3 and L4-L5 discs 4 weeks after the condoliase injection. Disc height (DH) was radiographically monitored biweekly from the day of condoliase injection to 16 weeks post-injection. Changes in DH were expressed as percentage DH (%DH) normalized to the baseline DH. Sixteen weeks after condoliase injection, all rabbits were euthanized, and subjected to MRI and histological analyses.ResultsIntradiscal injection of condoliase induced a significant decrease in %DH (L2-L3 and L4-L5) to 52.0% at week 4. However, the %DH began to return to normal after saline injection and reached 76.3% at week 16. In the PRPr group, %DH began to recover to normal after the PRPr injection and was restored to 95.5% at week 16. The MRI-modified Pfirrmann grade of the PRPr group was significantly lower than that of the saline group (P ConclusionsPRPr has great potential to enhance the regeneration of degenerated rabbit IVDs induced by condoliase. The results of this preclinical study suggest that PRPr injection therapy may be indicated for patients with LDH who have poor recovery from disc degeneration after chemonucleolysis treatment with condoliase.