TITLE: Are Absorbable Plates More Resistant to Infection Than Titanium Implants? An Experimental Pre-Clinical Trial in Rabbits.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/jfb14100498
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37888163

Background: Infection of orthopaedic implants after internal fixation of bone fractures remains a major complication with occasionally devastating consequences. Recent studies have reported that the use of absorbable materials, instead of metallic ones, may lead to a lower incidence of postoperative infection. In this experimental pre-clinical animal study, we compared the infection rate between absorbable implants consisting of copolymers composed from trimethylene carbonate, L-polylactic acid, and D, L-polylactic acid monomers, and titanium implants after the inoculation of a pathogenic microorganism. Material and Methods: We used an experimental implant-related infection model in rabbits. Sixty animals were randomly and equally divided into two groups. In all animals, the right femur was exposed via a lateral approach and a 2.5 mm two-hole titanium plate with screws (Group A), or a two-hole absorbable plate and screws (Group B), were applied in the femoral shaft. Afterwards, the implant surface was inoculated with Pseudomonas Aeruginosa at a concentration of 2 × 108 CFU/mL. The primary outcome was the comparison of the incidence of developed infection between the two groups. The wound condition was monitored on a daily basis and radiographies were obtained at 12 weeks postoperatively. Infection-related laboratory markers (white blood cell count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein values) were assessed at 3, 6, and 16 weeks postoperatively. Histologic analysis and cultures of tissue samples were also performed to evaluate the presence of infection. Results: Clinical and laboratory signs of infection were evident in 11 rabbits in Group A (36.7%), and 4 in Group B (13.3%). The difference between the groups was statistically significant (p = 0.04). Five animals in Group B (16.7%) had clinical and histologic signs of a foreign-body reaction with significantly elevated CRP and ESR values but no simultaneous presence of infection was identified (p = 0.04). Bone remodelling with thickening of the periosteum and surrounding sclerosis was demonstrated radiologically in animals developing infection or foreign-body reactions. Conclusions: Absorbable plates and screws show lower susceptibility to infection compared to titanium ones. However, their application is associated with foreign-body reaction and the potential need for a second surgical intervention.