TITLE: Conductivity reactivity index for monitoring of cerebrovascular autoregulation in early cerebral ischemic rabbits.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s12938-023-01142-7
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37559130

BackgroundCerebrovascular autoregulation (CVAR) is the mechanism that maintains constant cerebral blood flow by adjusting the caliber of the cerebral vessels. It is important to have an effective, contactless way to monitor and assess CVAR in patients with ischemia.MethodsThe adjustment of cerebral blood flow leads to changes in the conductivity of the whole brain. Here, whole-brain conductivity measured by the magnetic induction phase shift method is a valuable alternative to cerebral blood volume for non-contact assessment of CVAR. Therefore, we proposed the correlation coefficient between spontaneous slow oscillations in arterial blood pressure and the corresponding magnetic induction phase shift as a novel index called the conductivity reactivity index (CRx). In comparison with the intracranial pressure reactivity index (PRx), the feasibility of the conductivity reactivity index to assess CVAR in the early phase of cerebral ischemia has been preliminarily confirmed in animal experiments.ResultsThere was a significant difference in the CRx between the cerebral ischemia group and the control group (p = 0.002). At the same time, there was a significant negative correlation between the CRx and the PRx (r = - 0.642, p = 0.002) after 40 min after ischemia. The Bland-Altman consistency analysis showed that the two indices were linearly related, with a minimal difference and high consistency in the early ischemic period. The sensitivity and specificity of CRx for cerebral ischemia identification were 75% and 20%, respectively, and the area under the ROC curve of CRx was 0.835 (SE = 0.084).ConclusionThe animal experimental results preliminarily demonstrated that the CRx can be used to monitor CVAR and identify CVAR injury in early ischemic conditions. The CRx has the potential to be used for contactless, global, bedside, and real-time assessment of CVAR of patients with ischemic stroke.