TITLE: The synergistic impact of Spirulina and selenium nanoparticles mitigates the adverse effects of heat stress on the physiology of rabbits bucks.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0287644
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37437098

Heat stress has a detrimental effect on animal fertility, particularly testicular functions, including reduced sperm output and quality, which causes an economic loss in the production of rabbits. The present trial investigated the efficacy of dietary Spirulina (SP) (Arthrospira platensis), selenium nanoparticles (SeNPs), and their combination (SP-SeNPs) on semen quality, haemato-biochemical, oxidative stress, immunity, and sperm quality of heat-stressed (HS) rabbit bucks. Sixty mature bucks (APRI line) were distributed into 6 groups of ten replicates under controlled conditions. Bucks in the 1st group (control-NC) were kept under normal conditions (11-22°C; 40-45% RH% = relative humidity), while the 2nd group (control-HS) was kept under heat stress conditions (32±0.50°C; 60-66% RH %). The control groups were fed a commercial pelleted diet and the other four heat-stressed groups were fed a commercial pelleted diet with 1 g SP, 25 mg SeNPs, 1 g SP+25 mg SeNPs, and 1 g SP+50 mg SeNPs per kg diet, respectively. The dietary inclusion of SP, SeNPs, and their combinations significantly increased hemoglobin, platelets, total serum protein, high-density lipoproteins, glutathione, glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, and seminal plasma testosterone while decreased triglycerides, total cholesterol, urea, creatinine, and malondialdehyde compared with the control-HS. Red blood cells, packed cell volume, serum albumin, and testosterone significantly increased, while SeNPs, SP+SeNPs25, and SP+SeNPs50 significantly decreased low-density lipoproteins, aspartate, and alanine amino transferees. Total antioxidant capacity substantially increased in serum and seminal plasma, while seminal plasma malondialdehyde decreased in 25 or 50 mg of SeNPs+SP/kg groups. All supplements significantly improved libido, sperm livability, concentration, intact acrosome, membrane integrity, total output in fresh semen, and sperm quality in cryopreserved semen. SP-SeNPs50 had higher synergistic effect than SP-SeNPs25 on most different variables studied. In conclusion, the dietary inclusion of SP plus SeNPs50 has a synergistic effect and is considered a suitable dietary supplement for improving reproductive efficiency, health, oxidative stress, and immunity of bucks in the breeding strategy under hot climates.