TITLE: Effects of rabbit production on income and livelihood of rural households in Nigeria.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2023.e18568
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37576253

AimsMore effort and actions are needed to combat the rising levels of food insecurity and poverty in developing countries, particularly among rural households. Rural households can significantly contribute to reducing poverty, enhancing their nutritional condition, and enhancing their standard of living by engaging in rabbit production but there are few empirical studies on the contribution of rabbit production to households' livelihood and income. Therefore, this study examines how producing rabbits affects rural farmers' income and household livelihood in Nigeria.Methods and resultsMultiple regression and descriptive statistics were used to analyze the data gathered from 240 rabbit farms. The findings demonstrated that rabbit farming is a male-dominated enterprise (male 77.5%). According to the regression analysis, the income of rural households was positively and significantly impacted by the income from rabbits. Farmers' ages, interactions with extension agents, credit they accessed, and assets were further determinants of their income. Additionally, rabbit production improved the level of living of rural households. Access to forage, the prevalence of diseases, scarcity of veterinary, and the high cost of medication, were the severe constraints faced in rabbit production.ConclusionsIt may be concluded that rabbit production had a significant contribution to the economic situation, way of life, and well-being of rural households. Although there were some constraints with the operation. Females are to be encouraged in rabbit production as livelihood diversification. Also, it is crucial that banks, governments, and non-governmental organizations offer farmers easily accessible and reasonable loan facilities as this will boost their revenue. Training on forage production and storage is also recommended.Significance and the impact of the studyParticipation will be improved by having an understanding of how rabbit farming affects the income and way of life of rural dwellers. As a result, the findings of this study would enable policymakers to intervene in enhancing its production thereby encouraging more farmers to be involved in the production and also, enhancing the well-being of rural households.