TITLE: Mechanical crosstalk between the intervertebral disc, facet joints, and vertebral endplate following acute disc injury in a rabbit model.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1002/jsp2.1287
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38156057

BackgroundVertebral endplate sclerosis and facet osteoarthritis have been documented in animals and humans. However, it is unclear how these adjacent pathologies engage in crosstalk with the intervertebral disc. This study sought to elucidate this crosstalk by assessing each compartment individually in response to acute disc injury.MethodsEleven New Zealand White rabbits underwent annular disc puncture using a 16G or 21G needle. At 4 and 10 weeks, individual compartments of the motion segment were analyzed. Discs underwent T 1 relaxation mapping with MRI contrast agent gadodiamide as well T 2 mapping. Both discs and facets underwent mechanical testing via vertebra-disc-vertebra tension-compression creep testing and indentation testing, respectively. Endplate bone density was quantified via μCT. Discs and facets were sectioned and stained for histology scoring.ResultsIntervertebral discs became more degenerative with increasing needle diameter and time post-puncture. Bone density also increased in endplates adjacent to both 21G and 16G punctured discs leading to reduced gadodiamide transport at 10 weeks. The facet joints, however, did not follow this same trend. Facets adjacent to 16G punctured discs were less degenerative than facets adjacent to 21G punctured discs at 10 weeks. 16G facets were more degenerative at 4 weeks than at 10, suggesting the cartilage had recovered. The formation of severe disc osteophytes in 16G punctured discs between 4 and 10 weeks likely offloaded the facet cartilage, leading to the recovery observed.ConclusionsOverall, this study supports that degeneration spans the whole spinal motion segment following disc injury. Vertebral endplate thickening occurred in response to disc injury, which limited the diffusion of small molecules into the disc. This work also suggests that altered disc mechanics can induce facet degeneration, and that extreme bony remodeling adjacent to the disc may promote facet cartilage recovery through offloading of the articular cartilage.