TITLE: The Influence of a Nanoemulsion of Cardamom Essential Oil on the Growth Performance, Feed Utilization, Carcass Characteristics, and Health Status of Growing Rabbits under a High Ambient Temperature.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/ani13182990
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37760390

Recently, nanotechnology approaches have been employed to enhance the solubility, availability, and efficacy of phytochemicals, overcoming some industrial obstacles and natural biological barriers. In this regard, 120 clinically healthy growing V-line rabbits (5 weeks old) reared during the summer season were divided randomly into four equal experimental groups (30 rabbits each). The first group received a basal diet without the supplementation of the nanoemulsion of cardamom essential oil (NCEO) (0 g/kg diet) and served as a control (NCEO 0). The other groups were given diets containing NCEO at levels of 150 (NCEO 150), 300 (NCEO 300), and 600 (NCEO 600) mg/kg diet, respectively. The growth performance (higher LBW and ADG), feed utilization (lower FCR), dressing percentage, and relative weight of the liver were improved significantly in the NCEO-treated groups compared to the control group. Moreover, the dietary treatment significantly decreased the rectum temperature and respiration rate, minimizing the 350 and 325 mg NECO/kg diets. The erythrocyte count, hematocrit, and hemoglobin concentration were significantly increased (p p = 0.0200) in the NCEO300 and NCEO600 groups compared to the control group. Treatment with 300 or 600 mg NCEO/kg significantly increased the blood serum total protein and albumin compared to the control group. Meanwhile, the liver enzymes (AST and ALT), uric acid, and creatinine concentrations decreased significantly in the NCEO300 group compared to the control group. The concentrations of triglycerides and total cholesterol were reduced significantly by the dietary treatment. The total antioxidant capacity, dismutase activity, and glutathione concentration were significantly higher, while the malondialdehyde and protein carbonyl levels were significantly lower in the NCEO300 group than in the control. The inflammatory responses and immunity statuses were improved in the blood serum of the NCEO-treated rabbits compared to the control. Heat-stress-induced pathological perturbations in renal/hepatic tissues and NCEO co-treatment successfully re-established and recovered near-control renal-hepatic morphology. In conclusion, a dietary supplementation of NCEO (300 mg/kg) could effectively enhance growing rabbits' growth indices, feed efficiency, redox balance, immunity, and inflammatory responses during the summer.