TITLE: Intralesional Axitinib Injection Mitigates Hypertrophic Scar by Inhibiting Angiogenesis Pathway: A Preliminary Study in a Rabbit Ear Model.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.2147/ccid.s430852
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37901151

ObjectiveHigh levels of VEGF and excessive angiogenesis contribute significantly to hypertrophic scar (HS) formation. Our study aimed to preliminarily investigate the effect of axitinib, a selective VEGF receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor, on angiogenesis of HS and to explore its possible mechanism in a rabbit ear model.MethodsTen male New Zealand white rabbits were used to establish HS models and then randomised to the control and axitinib groups. The scar tissues in the two groups were injected with axitinib or normal saline, and they were evaluated after one month of treatment. Macroscopic scar thickness, vascularity and pliability, as well as histopathological analysis including HE staining and Masson staining and scar elevation index (SEI) between two groups were compared. Immunohistochemical staining of CD31 in two groups was conducted to assess the degree of angiogenesis in HS tissue. The protein expression of protein kinase B (AKT) and ribosomal protein S6 kinase (p70S6K) and their phosphorylation levels in both groups were examined by Western blot analysis.ResultsThe macroscopic and histological observation showed intralesional axitinib injection significantly reduced scar thickness, vascularity and pliability of HS in the rabbit ear model. The value of SEI in HE assessment was also significantly declined in the axitinib group. Furthermore, immunohistochemical analysis revealed that axitinib suppressed the expression of CD31 in HS tissue, and the mean IOD for blood vessels was significantly lower in the axitinib-treated group. Additionally, axitinib effectively attenuated the protein expression of p70S6K, p-AKT and p-p70S6K by Western blot analysis.ConclusionOur study suggests that intralesional injection of axitinib can effectively attenuate HS by reducing angiogenesis in the rabbit ear model, and this inhibitory effect may be mediated by suppression of AKT/p70S6K signaling pathway. It indicates that axitinib may be a promising option for the treatment of HS in the future.