TITLE: Intrageneric cross-reactivity of monospecific rabbit antisera against venoms of the medically most important Naja spp. African snakes.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0011545
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37582064

BackgroundEnvenomations by African snakes represent a high burden in the sub-Sahara region. The design and fabrication of polyspecific antivenoms with a broader effectiveness, specially tailored for its use in sub-Saharan Africa, require a better understanding of the immunological features of different Naja spp. venoms of highest medical impact in Africa; and to select the most appropriate antigen combinations to generate antivenoms of wider neutralizing scope.Methodology/principal findingsRabbit-derived monospecific antisera were raised against the venoms of five spitting cobras and six non-spitting cobras. The effects of immunization in the animal model were assessed, as well as the development of antibody titers, as proved by immunochemical assays and neutralization of lethal, phospholipase A2 and dermonecrotic activities. By the end of the immunization schedule, the immunized rabbits showed normal values of all hematological parameters, and no muscle tissue damage was evidenced, although alterations in aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) suggested a degree of hepatic damage caused mainly by spitting cobra venoms. Immunologic analyses revealed a considerable extent of cross-reactivity of monospecific antisera against heterologous venoms within the spitting and no-spitting cobras, yet some antisera showed more extensive cross-reactivity than others. The antisera with the widest coverage were those of anti-Naja ashei and anti-N. nigricollis for the spitting cobras, and anti-N. haje and anti-N. senegalensis for the non-spitting cobras.Conclusions/significanceThe methods and study design followed provide a rationale for the selection of the best combination of venoms for generating antivenoms of high cross-reactivity against cobra venoms in sub-Saharan Africa. Results suggest that venoms from N. ashei, N. nigricollis within the spitting cobras, and N. haje and N. senegalensis within the non-spitting cobras, generate antisera with a broader cross-reactivity. These experimental results should be translated to larger animal models used in antivenom elaboration to assess whether these predictions are reproduced.