TITLE: Mechanical properties of the rabbit and human decellularized patches for well-tolerated/reinforced organ in cardiac tissue engineering.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.34172/jcvtr.2023.32926
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38357560

IntroductionNatural decellularized patches have been developed as the therapeutic platform for the treatment of different diseases, especially cardiovascular disorders. Decellularized scaffolds (as both cell-seeded and cell-free patches) are broadly studied in heart tissue redevelopment in vivo and in vitro. The designed regenerative bio-scaffold must have desirable physicochemical properties including mechanical stiffness for load-bearing, and appropriate anatomical characteristics to mimic the native biological environment properly and facilitate tissue reconstruction. In this context, the current study was designed to investigate rabbit decellularized derma's similarity with human decellularized skin in terms of mechanical properties for cardiac tissue engineering application.MethodsFifty two rabbit dermal specimens were provided and divided into two groups: the experimental (decellularized) group and the control (group). Similarly, twelve human skin specimens were divided into the experimental (decellularized) and control groups. Initially, the effect of decellularization on the mechanical performance of scaffolds was analyzed. Then, the mechanical strength of decellularized rabbit skin was compared to decellularized human derma by measuring the stress strain and Young's modulus of the samples.ResultsThe results showed that rabbit decellularized skin has a similar elastic range to human decellularized skin, despite being more elastic (P>0.05). In addition, after decellularization, both rabbit and human skin showed a non-significant decrease in elasticity (P>0.05). It is worth noting that the elasticity reduction in rabbit samples after skin decellularization was lower than in human samples.ConclusionAccording to the results of this study and the similarities of rabbit decellularized derm to human skin and its advantages over it, along with the biological complexity of native cardiac ECM, this scaffold can be used as an alternative matrix for tissue-engineered cardiac patches.