TITLE: Characterizing post-branching nephrogenesis in the neonatal rabbit.
YEAR: 2023
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-023-46624-9
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37932368

Human nephrogenesis ends prior to birth in term infants (34-36 week gestation), with most (60%) nephrons forming in late gestation in two post-branching nephrogenesis (PBN) periods: arcading and lateral branch nephrogenesis. Preterm infants, however, must execute PBN postnatally. Extreme prematurity is associated with low nephron counts. Identifying additional model(s) that undergo PBN postnatally will help support postnatal PBN in preterm infants. The rabbit exhibits longer postnatal nephrogenesis than the mouse but whether it forms nephrons through PBN has not been determined. We performed morphologic and immunohistological assessments of rabbit nephrogenesis from birth (post-conceptual day 31 or 32) to PC49 using H&E and antibodies against SIX1, SIX2, WT1, ZO-1, and JAG1 in the postnatal period. We performed 3D rendering of the nephrogenic niche to assess for PBN, and supplemented the staining with RNAScope to map the expression of Six1, Six2 (nephron progenitors, NPC), and Ret (ureteric bud tip) transcripts to determine the nephrogenic niche postnatal lifespan. Unlike the mouse, rabbit SIX2 disappeared from NPC before SIX1, resembling the human niche. Active nephrogenesis as defined by the presence of SIX1 + naïve NPC/tip population persisted only until PC35-36 (3-5 postnatal days). 3D morphologic assessments of the cortical nephrons identified an elongated tubule with attached glomeruli extending below the UB tip, consistent with PBN arcades, but not with lateral branch nephrogenesis. We conclude that the rabbit shows morphologic and molecular evidence of PBN arcades continuing postnatally for a shorter period than previously thought. The rabbit is the first non-primate expressing SIX1 in the progenitor population. Our findings suggest that studies of arcading in postnatal nephrogenic niche should be performed within the first 5 days of life in the rabbit.