TITLE: Isolation and Characterization of Meniscus Progenitor Cells From Rat, Rabbit, Goat, and Human.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1177/19476035241266579
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39058020

ObjectiveMeniscus progenitor cells (MPCs) have been identified as promising candidates for meniscus regeneration, and it is crucial for us to understand meniscus injury repair mechanism at the cellular level. In this study, we investigate the biological properties of MPCs isolated from different species using the differential adhesion to fibronectin (DAF) technique. We aim to characterize MPCs in different species and evaluate the feasibility of these models for future meniscal investigation.DesignMPCs were isolated from freshly digested meniscus from rat, rabbit, goat, and human cells using DAF. Biological properties, including proliferation, colony-forming, multilineage differentiation, and migration abilities, were compared in MPCs and their corresponding mixed meniscus cell (MCs) population in each species.ResultsMPCs were successfully isolated by the DAF technique in all species. Rat MPCs appeared cobblestone-like, rabbit MPCs were more polygonal, goat MPCs had a spindle-shaped morphology, human MPCs appear more fibroblast-like. Compared with MCs, isolated MPCs showed progenitor cell characteristics, including multilineage differentiation ability and MSC (mesenchymal stem cells) markers (CD166, CD90, CD44, Stro-1) expression. They also highly expressed fibronectin receptors CD49e and CD49c. MPCs also showed greater proliferation capacity and retained colony-forming ability. Except for goat MPCs showed greater migration abilities than MCs, no significant differences were found in the migration ability between MPCs and MCs in other species.ConclusionOur study shows that DAF is an effective method for isolating MPCs from rat, rabbit, goat, and human. MPCs in these species demonstrated similar characteristics, including greater proliferation ability and better chondrogenic potential.