TITLE: Impact of Zinc Oxide on the Development of Aspergillus-Induced Maxillary Sinusitis Rabbit Model.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/cimb46060342
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38921013

Aspergillus fumigatus is commonly found in the airway and is associated with airway inflammatory diseases. Zinc oxide (ZO) is known to be an essential microelement that facilitates fungal survival, growth, and proliferation. This study aimed to investigate the impact of ZO on A. fumigatus-induced fungal sinusitis in rabbits. Twenty-eight New Zealand white rabbits were divided into four groups for this study. Group 1 (6 sides) was treated with intramaxillary phosphate buffer saline (PBS) served as the negative control, Group 2 (6 sides) received intramaxillary PBS and ZO, Group 3 (8 sides) was treated with intramaxillary A. fumigatus alone, and Group 4 (8 sides) treated with intramaxillary A. fumigatus with ZO. After 4 and 12 weeks, sinus mucosal cytokine and transcription factor expressions were determined. A histological analysis was performed to determine inflammatory cell infiltration, number of secretory cells, and mucosal thickness. Fungal biofilm formation was determined using confocal laser microscopy. The intramaxillary instillation of A. fumigatus conidia led to an increase in protein and mRNA expression of interleukin (IL)-1β and IL-8 in the maxillary sinus mucosa. They were associated with mitogen-activated protein kinase and activator protein-1. Furthermore, intramaxillary instillation of fungal conidia resulted in significant enhancement of inflammatory cell infiltration, epithelial thickening, and fungal biofilm formation. However, intramaxillary ZO did not have a significant impact on A. fumigatus-induced cytokine protein and mRNA expression, and inflammatory cell infiltration and epithelial thickness in sinonasal mucosa. While intramaxillary instillation of A. fumigatus increased mucosal inflammation, cytokine production, and biofilm formation, the intramaxillary application of ZO did not have a significant influence on inflammation in the maxillary sinus mucosa.