TITLE: SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV -2 cross-reactive antibodies in domestic animals and wildlife in Nigeria suggest circulation of sarbecoviruses.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1016/j.onehlt.2024.100709
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38533194

Anthropogenic exposure of domestic animals, as well as wildlife, can result in zoonotic transmission events with known and unknown pathogens including sarbecoviruses. During the COVID-19 pandemic, SARS-CoV-2 infections in animals, most likely resulting from spill-over from humans, have been documented worldwide. However, only limited information is available for Africa. The anthropozoonotic transmission from humans to animals, followed by further inter- and intraspecies propagation may contribute to viral evolution, and thereby subsequently alter the epidemiological patterns of transmission. To shed light on the possible role of domestic animals and wildlife in the ecology and epidemiology of sarbecoviruses in Nigeria, and to analyze the possible circulation of other, undiscovered, but potentially zoonotic sarbecoviruses in animals, we tested 504 serum samples from dogs, rabbits, bats, and pangolins collected between December 2020 and April 2022. The samples were analyzed using an indirect multi-species enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) based on the receptor binding domain (RBD) of SARS-CoV and SARS-CoV -2, respectively. ELISA reactive sera were further analyzed by highly specific virus neutralization test and indirect immunofluorescence assay for confirmation of the presence of antibodies. In this study, we found SARS-CoV reactive antibodies in 16 (11.5%) dogs, 7 (2.97%) rabbits, 2 (7.7%) pangolins and SARS-CoV-2 reactive antibodies in 20 (13.4%) dogs, 6 (2.5%) rabbits and 2 (7.7%) pangolins, respectively. Interestingly, 2 (2.3%) bat samples were positive only for SARS-CoV RBD reactive antibodies. These serological findings of SARS-CoV and/or SARS-CoV-2 infections in both domestic animals and wildlife indicates exposure to sarbecoviruses and requires further One Health-oriented research on the potential reservoir role that different species might play in the ecology and epidemiology of coronaviruses at the human-animal interface.