TITLE: The impact of integrating rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus (K5) release with pindone baiting on wild rabbit populations.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1002/ece3.10991
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38476706

Several conventional and recently available tools are available for an integrated control of European rabbits in Australia. We quantified the impact of the release of rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus K5 (RHDV K5, hereafter K5) and pindone (2-pivalyl-1,3-indandione) baiting at 13 sites within Cudlee Creek fire scar in the Adelaide Hills, South Australia. K5 release was followed by pindone baiting between December 2021 and March 2022; the application of both control methods followed industry best practice. We counted rabbits using spotlights before and after the application of both control methods. Fly samples and livers from dead rabbits were collected to track K5 transmission within and between sites, and to detect the natural circulation of rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus 2 (RHDV2). K5 release had minimal impact on rabbit populations, with treated populations increasing by a mean of 65.5% at 14 days post-release and 27.9% at 77 days post-K5 release across all sites, comparable to the changes at control sites. K5 detection in flies up to 77 days post its release, and its detection in rabbit livers, demonstrates that it can survive and transmit in the environment for prolonged periods and that it can lethally infect some rabbits. This limited impact of K5 is consistent with previous studies and may be explained by pre-existing RHDV/RHDV2 immunity in the target populations or the presence of young rabbits with natural innate RHDV immunity. The detection of K5 in flies from control sites demonstrates that it was vectored beyond its release location. A reduction in rabbit counts post-pindone baiting was observed at most treatment sites, with a mean population reduction of 36.6% across all sites. Landholders need to carefully and strategically plan their integrated rabbit control programmes. Not all combinations of controls, even if theoretically logical, achieve meaningful outcomes for rabbit management.