TITLE: Effect of pomegranate peel with/without autologous bone marrow on healing of acute cutaneous wounds in alloxan-induced diabetic rabbits.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.5455/ovj.2024.v14.i6.4
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39055750

BackgroundHealing of bum wounds is commonly associated with many complications. Every year various new repair materials are developed and experimentally used for treating burn wounds. Humans with diabetes mellitus usually suffer from chronic wound healing. Vascular, neuropathic, immune function, and biochemical abnormalities each contribute to the altered tissue repair. One underlying factor that accompanies all diabetic ulcerations is poor vascular flow, a circumstance that impedes proper wound healing. Numerous studies have highlighted the importance of adequate vascular sufficiency and vessel proliferation in tissue repair and the lack thereof in diabetic wound healing. Other studies have looked at whether disarrayed capillary remodeling and maturation of vessels might play a role in impaired diabetic wound healing.AimThis investigation has been planned to report the influence of treatment with a mixture of both the powder of pomegranate peel (PP) accompanied with an autologous bone marrow (BM) on the cure of burn injuries in experimentally induced diabetic rabbits.MethodsAlloxan monohydrate has been applied to create diabetes in 50 rabbits. Then in each rabbit, two deep second-degree burn wounds were experimentally created. The animals were then divided randomly into 5 treatment sections: non-treatment controls (C1), treated with an available commercial powder for wound (C2), treatment with powder of PP, treatment with alone BM, and the final group treated with PP powder with bone marrow (PPBM). The speed of wound closure and the histopathological changes during healing were measured. The levels of the biomarkers of rabbit platelet-derived growth factor AA (PDGF-AA) and rabbit protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR-1) were measured on days 0, 4, 8, and 12.ResultsWound healing was markedly more rapid in all the treatment groups versus the control non-treated group. Interestingly, a rapid wound cure was significantly observed in the PPBM group versus the other treatment ones. The histological assessment clarified a significant elevation in the fibroblast and collagen scores in the PPBM group versus the other sections. In addition, there were significant increases in the serum levels of the biomarkers PDGF-AA and PAR-1 among groups.ConclusionDependent on the results of current research, it can be concluded that both PP powder with BM PPBM significantly accelerate the healing process of burn wounds in experimentally induced diabetic rabbits.