TITLE: Intrasynovial autograft for reconstruction of chronic large rotator cuff tears in a rabbit model: biomechanical, computed tomography, and histological results.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s13018-024-04691-2
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38575992

BackgroundRotator cuff (RC) tears are a common cause of shoulder dysfunction and pain, posing significant challenges for orthopedic surgeons. Grafts have been proposed as a solution to augment or bridge torn tendons, but optimal clinical outcomes are not always achieved due to poor graft integration, suboptimal mechanical properties, and immunological reactions. The aim of this study was to investigate the biomechanical, CT and histological results of RC reconstruction using an intrasynovial tendon autograft, in a chronic large tear subscapularis rabbit model.MethodsTwenty-six adult male Zealand white rabbits were used in this study. Large defects in the subscapularis tendons were produced bilaterally in 20 rabbits. After 6 weeks, secondary procedures were performed to the right shoulder of the rabbits, which were reconstructed with an intrasynovial interposition autograft (graft group). The left shoulder did not undergo any further treatment (defect group). The specimens were randomly divided into two equal time groups and underwent biomechanical testing, CT analysis, and histological evaluation at 6, and 12 weeks after reconstruction. In addition, 6 rabbits that were not operated, were used as a control group.ResultsAt 12 weeks post-repair, the graft group exhibited a significant increase in ultimate failure load compared to the defect group (p ConclusionOur study suggests that intrasynovial flexor tendon autografts hold promise as an effective interposition graft for the reconstruction of chronic large RC tears, as they improve the biomechanical and biological properties of the repaired tendon. Nonetheless, further investigations in preclinical large animal models are warranted to validate and extrapolate these findings to human studies.