TITLE: Sympathetic structural and electrophysiological remodeling in a rabbit model of reperfused myocardial infarction.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00398.2024
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39028283

Chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans (CSPGs) inhibit sympathetic reinnervation in rodent hearts post-myocardial infarction (MI), causing regional hypoinnervation that is associated with supersensitivity of β-adrenergic receptors and increased arrhythmia susceptibility. To investigate the role of CSPGs and hypoinnervation in the heart of larger mammals, we used a rabbit model of reperfused MI and tested electrophysiological responses to sympathetic nerve stimulation (SNS). Innervated hearts from MI and sham rabbits were optically mapped using voltage and Ca2+-sensitive dyes. SNS was performed with electrical stimulation of the spinal cord, and β-adrenergic responsiveness was tested using isoproterenol. Sympathetic nerve density and CSPG expression were evaluated using immunohistochemistry. CSPGs were robustly expressed in the infarct region of all MI hearts, and the presence of CSPGs was associated with reduced sympathetic nerve density in the infarct versus remote region. Action potential duration (APD) dispersion and tendency for induction of ventricular tachycardia/fibrillation (VT/VF) were increased with SNS in MI but not sham hearts. SNS decreased APD at 80% repolarization (APD80) in MI but not sham hearts, whereas isoproterenol decreased APD80 in both groups. Isoproterenol also shortened Ca2+ transient duration at 80% repolarization in both groups but to a greater extent in MI hearts. Our data suggest that sympathetic remodeling post-MI is similar between rodents and rabbits, with CSPGs associated with sympathetic hypoinnervation. Despite a reduction in sympathetic nerve density, the infarct region of MI hearts remained responsive to both physiological SNS and isoproterenol, potentially through preserved or elevated β-adrenergic responsiveness, which may underlie increased APD dispersion and tendency for VT/VF.NEW & NOTEWORTHY Here, we show that CSPGs are present in the infarcts of rabbit hearts with reperfused MI, where they are associated with reduced sympathetic nerve density. Despite hypoinnervation, sympathetic responsiveness is maintained or enhanced in MI rabbit hearts, which also demonstrate increased APD dispersion and tendency for arrhythmias following sympathetic modulation. Together, this study indicates that the mechanisms of sympathetic remodeling post-MI are similar between rodents and rabbits, with hypoinnervation likely associated with enhanced β-adrenergic sensitivity.