TITLE: Parasitological and molecular investigation of consequences of raw meat feeding (BARF) in dogs and cats: implications for other pets living nearby.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1007/s00436-024-08124-1
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38285200

Considering the original nature of carnivorism among dogs and cats, nowadays these pets are increasingly fed BARF (Biologically Appropriate Raw Food/Bone And Raw Food) diet to improve their health conditions. However, this diet may also carry health risks, such as vitamin or mineral deficiencies, and infection with pathogens including parasites. In our study, fecal samples of 89 pet animals kept on BARF diet were subjected to coprological examination followed by molecular analyses. Six of them shed eggs of Dicrocoelium dendriticum. This result was confirmed with PCR and sequencing, and in one case, the DNA of Fasciola hepatica was also demonstrated. In addition, oocysts of Cystoisospora canis, a Cystoisospora ohioensis-like sp. and Eimeria stiedai, as well as sporocysts of a Sarcocystis sp. were also detected. All samples were negative for Neospora caninum and Toxoplasma gondii. In conclusion, no evidence was found for the infection of BARF-fed dogs and cats with parasites that are usually associated with this diet and considered as clinico-pathological risk factors for these pets themselves (e.g., N. caninum, T. gondii). However, fluke eggs (probably originating from ruminants) and oocysts of E. stiedai (from rabbit liver in the food) were demonstrated as pseudoparasites. These species are usually not considered among parasite-associated risks of BARF-feeding, implying that other animals living near BARF-fed pets are neglected in this context. However, where intermediate hosts of D. dendriticum occur in urban areas, BARF-feeding may indirectly affect later other dogs and cats. It was also shown here that BARF-feeding may contribute to the contamination of the environment with E. stiedai oocysts, thus increasing the risks of biliary coccidiosis in nearby living pet rabbits that would otherwise not have access to oocysts of E. stiedai.