TITLE: Therapeutic effect of three-dimensional hanging drop cultured human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells on osteoarthritis in rabbits.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s13287-024-03905-y
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39294780

BackgroundMesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have shown a positive effect on Osteoarthritis (OA), but the efficacy is still not significant in clinical. Conventional two-dimensional (2D) monolayer culture method is prone to cause MSCs undergoing replication senescence, which may affect the functions of MSCs. Three-dimensional (3D) culture strategy can sustain cell proliferative capacity and multi-differentiation potential. This study aimed to investigate the therapeutic potential of human umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hUC-MSCs) cultured by 3D hanging drop method on OA.MethodshUC-MSCs were isolated from umbilical cord and cultured by 3D hanging drop method for 48 h. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to observe gross morphology 2D and 3D hUC-MSCs. Transcriptome comparison of gene expression differences between 2D and 3D hUC-MSCs. GO enrichment analysis, KEGG pathway enrichment analysis and GSEA enrichment analysis were used to analyze the impact of 3D hanging drop culture on the biological functions of hUC-MSCs. Female New Zealand rabbits (n = 12) were divided into 4 groups: Normal group, Model group, 2D hUC-MSCs treatment group and 3D hUC-MSCs treatment group. After 8 weeks, the gross and histological appearance of the cartilage was evaluated by safranin O-fast green staining and Mankin scoring system. The expression of type I collagen and type II collagen was detected by immunohistochemistry. The levels of IL-6, IL-7, TNFα, TGFβ1 and IL-10 in the knee joint fluid were tested by ELISA.Results3D hanging drop culture changed cell morphology but did not affect phenotype. The MSCs transcriptome profiles showed that 3D hanging drop culture method enhanced cell-cell contact, improved cell responsiveness to external stimuli and immunomodulatory function. The animal experiment results showed that hUC-MSCs could promote cartilage regeneration compared with Model group. 3D hUC-MSCs treatment group had a higher histological score and significantly increased type II collagen secretion. In addition, 3D hUC-MSCs treatment group increased the expression of anti-inflammatory factors TGFβ1 and IL-10.ConclusionThe above experimental results illustrated that 3D hanging drop culture method could enhance the therapeutic effect of hUC-MSCs, and showed a good clinical application prospect in the treatment of OA.