TITLE: Rabbit and Human Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme-2: Structure and Electric Properties.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/ijms252212393
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39596458

The angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 (ACE2) is a transmembrane glycoprotein, consisting of two segments: a large carboxypeptidase catalytic domain and a small transmembrane collectrin-like segment. This protein plays an essential role in blood pressure regulation, transforming the peptides angiotensin-I and angiotensin-II (vasoconstrictors) into angiotensin-1-9 and angiotensin-1-7 (vasodilators). During the COVID-19 pandemic, ACE2 became best known as the receptor of the S-protein of SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus. The purpose of the following research is to reconstruct the 3D structure of the catalytic domain of the rabbit enzyme rACE2 using its primary amino acid sequence, and then to compare it with the human analog hACE2. For this purpose, we have calculated the electric properties and thermodynamic stability of the two protein globules employing computer programs for protein electrostatics. The analysis of the amino acid content and sequence demonstrates an 85% identity between the two polypeptide chains. The 3D alignment of the catalytic domains of the two enzymes shows coincidence of the α-helix segments, and a small difference in two unstructured segments of the chain. The electric charge of the catalytic domain of rACE2, determined by 70 positively chargeable amino acid residues, 114 negatively chargeable ones, and two positive charges of the Zn2+ atom in the active center exceeds that of hACE2 by one positively and four negatively chargeable groups; however, in 3D conformation, their isoelectric points pI 5.21 coincide. The surface electrostatic potential is similarly distributed on the surface of the two catalytic globules, but it strongly depends on the pH of the extracellular medium: it is almost positive at pH 5.0 but strongly negative at pH 7.4. The pH dependence of the electrostatic component of the free energy discloses that the 3D structure of the two enzymes is maximally stable at pH 6.5. The high similarity in the 3D structure, as well as in the electrostatic and thermodynamic properties, suggests that rabbit can be successfully used as an animal model to study blood pressure regulation and coronavirus infection, and the results can be extrapolated to humans.