TITLE: Rotator cuff repair with all-suture anchor enhances biomechanical properties and tendon-bone integration in a rabbit model.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e37707
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39323815

BackgroundAll-suture anchor (ASA) is a special type of suture anchor. It has been used to repair rotator cuff tears (RCTs). However, mechanical properties and tendon-bone integration at different time postoperatively remains to be unclear.MethodsMechanical testing and water contact angle measurements were conducted for ASA. In vitro biocompatibility was assessed using rat bone marrow stem cells (BMSCs), including live/dead cell staining and Cell Counting Kit-8 assays. ASA was implanted for rotator cuff repair (ASA group) in a New Zealand White rabbit model of RCTs, and a natural rotator cuff was used as a control (natural group). The animals were sacrificed, and tissue samples were harvested for biomechanical, radiographic, and histological analysis at 4, 8, and 12 weeks postoperatively.ResultsASA was hydrophobic and had a strong mechanical property in vitro. The biocompatibility analysis showed that ASA had no effect on the viability of BMSCs. Mechanical testing in vivo revealed that a gradually improved failure load of ASA group was 118.0 ± 22.53N at 12 weeks postoperatively, which was recovered to the natural group. Micro-CT analysis indicated that an initial decrease in BMD and trabecular quality following ASA implantation, with a slight recovery observed at 12 weeks. Additionally, histological analysis showed the tendon-bone interface gradually integrated in the ASA group. A significant increase in tendon-bone interface scores was found from 4 weeks to 12 weeks. Tendon maturing score also improved in the ASA group, and Type I collagen content recovered to 18.58 ± 4.378 % at 12 weeks and no different from that of the natural group.ConclusionRotator cuff repair with ASA in a rabbit model demonstrated the capacity to enhance biomechanical properties and tendon-bone integration.