TITLE: Folliculogenesis and steroidogenesis alterations after chronic exposure to a human-relevant mixture of environmental toxicants spare the ovarian reserve in the rabbit model.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s13048-024-01457-6
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38943138

BackgroundIndustrial progress has led to the omnipresence of chemicals in the environment of the general population, including reproductive-aged and pregnant women. The reproductive function of females is a well-known target of endocrine-disrupting chemicals. This function holds biological processes that are decisive for the fertility of women themselves and for the health of future generations. However, insufficient research has evaluated the risk of combined mixtures on this function. This study aimed to assess the direct impacts of a realistic exposure to eight combined environmental toxicants on the critical process of folliculogenesis.MethodsFemale rabbits were exposed daily and orally to either a mixture of eight environmental toxicants (F group) or the solvent mixture (NE group, control) from 2 to 19 weeks of age. The doses were computed from previous toxicokinetic data to reproduce steady-state serum concentrations in rabbits in the range of those encountered in pregnant women. Ovarian function was evaluated through macroscopic and histological analysis of the ovaries, serum hormonal assays and analysis of the expression of steroidogenic enzymes. Cellular dynamics in the ovary were further investigated with Ki67 staining and TUNEL assays.ResultsF rabbits grew similarly as NE rabbits but exhibited higher total and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol levels in adulthood. They also presented a significantly elevated serum testosterone concentrations, while estradiol, progesterone, AMH and DHEA levels remained unaffected. The measurement of gonadotropins, androstenedione, pregnenolone and estrone levels yielded values below the limit of quantification. Among the 7 steroidogenic enzymes tested, an isolated higher expression of Cyp19a1 was measured in F rabbits ovaries. Those ovaries presented a significantly greater density/number of antral and atretic follicles and larger antral follicles without any changes in cellular proliferation or DNA fragmentation. No difference was found regarding the count of other follicle stages notably the primordial stage, the corpora lutea or AMH serum levels.ConclusionFolliculogenesis and steroidogenesis seem to be subtly altered by exposure to a human-like mixture of environmental toxicants. The antral follicle growth appears promoted by the mixture of chemicals both in their number and size, potentially explaining the increase in atretic antral follicles. Reassuringly, the ovarian reserve estimated through primordial follicles number/density and AMH is spared from any alteration. The consequences of these changes on fertility and progeny health have yet to be investigated.