TITLE: Arterial stiffness of the aorta and iliofemoral artery and their responses to nitroglycerin administration in myocardial infarction-prone Watanabe heritable hyperlipidemic rabbits.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1097/hjh.0000000000003608
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37937516

ObjectivesThe role of hypercholesterolemia in arterial stiffness, which usually reflects the progression of atherosclerosis has not been fully investigated. To clarify the meaning of arterial stiffness in hypercholesterolemia, we evaluated arterial stiffness in myocardial infarction-prone Watanabe heritable hyperlipidemic (WHHLMI) rabbits by using new arterial stiffness indices of the aorta and common iliac to femoral artery. The new arterial stiffness indices of both arteries were determined by the application of the theory of cardio-ankle vascular index (CAVI) to the aorta (aBeta) and ilio-femoral artery (ifBeta). Furthermore, the responses of both indices to nitroglycerin (NTG) administration were compared between WHHHMI and normal rabbits.Design and methodsaBeta and ifBeta of WHHLMI and normal rabbits were measured under anesthesia. Pulse wave velocity in the whole aorta (aPWV) and ilio-femoral artery (ifPWV), blood pressure, and other parameters were measured before and after administration of NTG (50-120 μg/kg/min) every 1 for 5 min.ResultsAtherosclerotic lesions were observed in the aorta, but a little in the ilio-femoral artery in WHHLMI rabbits. Compared with normal rabbits, aBeta was significantly higher, but ifBeta was lower in WHHLMI rabbits. When NTG was administered, ifBeta decreased significantly in both groups; however, aBeta increased in normal rabbits, but remained unchanged in WHHIMI rabbits.ConclusionThese findings suggested that hereditary hypercholesterolemia in rabbits did not uniformly enhance arterial stiffness in elastic artery and muscular artery. The responses to NTG were also different between two arteries. The mechanism of these different responses needs further studies.