TITLE: Accumulation of Iron Oxide-Based Contrast Agents in Rabbit Atherosclerotic Plaques in Relation to Plaque Age and Vulnerability Features.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.2147/ijn.s430693
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38406599

PurposeIn this study, a detailed characterization of a rabbit model of atherosclerosis was performed to assess the optimal time frame for evaluating plaque vulnerability using superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle (SPION)-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).MethodsThe progression of atherosclerosis induced by ballooning and a high-cholesterol diet was monitored using angiography, and the resulting plaques were characterized using immunohistochemistry and histology. Morphometric analyses were performed to evaluate plaque size and vulnerability features. The accumulation of SPIONs (novel dextran-coated SPIONDex and ferumoxytol) in atherosclerotic plaques was investigated by histology and MRI and correlated with plaque age and vulnerability. Toxicity of SPIONDex was evaluated in rats.ResultsWeak positive correlations were detected between plaque age and intima thickness, and total macrophage load. A strong negative correlation was observed between the minimum fibrous cap thickness and plaque age as well as the mean macrophage load. The accumulation of SPION in the atherosclerotic plaques was detected by MRI 24 h after administration and was subsequently confirmed by Prussian blue staining of histological specimens. Positive correlations between Prussian blue signal in atherosclerotic plaques, plaque age, and macrophage load were detected. Very little iron was observed in the histological sections of the heart and kidney, whereas strong staining of SPIONDex and ferumoxytol was detected in the spleen and liver. In contrast to ferumoxytol, SPIONDex administration in rabbits was well tolerated without inducing hypersensitivity. The maximum tolerated dose in rat model was higher than 100 mg Fe/kg.ConclusionOlder atherosclerotic plaques with vulnerable features in rabbits are a useful tool for investigating iron oxide-based contrast agents for MRI. Based on the experimental data, SPIONDex particles constitute a promising candidate for further clinical translation as a safe formulation that offers the possibility of repeated administration free from the risks associated with other types of magnetic contrast agents.