TITLE: Sustained Delivery of Rifampicin Nanoformulation Administration Intravitreally Into Rabbit Eyes for Ocular Tuberculosis.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.65368
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39184745

IntroductionDiagnosis and treatment of ocular tuberculosis is very challenging. It poses a significant and potential management dilemma after diagnosis as a primary, active, or secondary infection. The higher amounts of orally administered antitubercular drugs are needed to achieve the therapeutic concentration in the eye, which may lead to a higher risk of side effects. However, the intravitreal administration of drugs is not practiced because of the frequent administration of the injections.MethodsThis study was carried out to develop, optimize, and characterize rifampicin-loaded poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles to make them sustained release followed by the direct administration of plain rifampicin and rifampicin nano-formulations in the vitreous of rabbit eyes. Both groups were comparatively assessed for the sustained delivery of the two preparations in the vitreous and their systemic toxicity.ResultsThe characteristics of rifampicin-loaded nanoparticles were 786 nm in size with narrow size distribution along with a zeta potential of -12 mV. The drug encapsulation efficiency and loading capacity were 67.68% w/w and 42.28% w/w, respectively. The four New Zealand white rabbits were divided into two groups and given plain rifampicin (50µl volume) and PLGA nanoformulations of rifampicin (50µl volume) in each eye. In vivo, rifampicin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles produced sustained release of rifampicin for a week, even obtaining the 0.51 µg/ml levels on the seventh day in vitreous against negligible levels after one day for free rifampicin. The Cmax levels for free Rifampicin and Rifampicin nanoparticles were 0.44 µg/ml and 1.86 µg/ml, respectively.ConclusionIn this experimental proof-of-concept study, we have found that rifampicin-loaded PLGA nanoparticles released rifampicin in a sustained manner for up to seven days compared to free drugs only for one day into the vitreous. The intravitreal-administered drug did not reach systemic circulation.