TITLE: Microvascular permeability and texture analysis of bone marrow in diabetic rabbits with critical limb ischemia based on dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1111/jdi.14145
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38240456

BackgroundEarly on in the development of diabetes, skeletal muscles can exhibit microarchitectural changes that can be detected using texture analysis (TA) based on volume transfer constant (Ktrans) maps. Nevertheless, there have been few studies and thus we evaluated microvascular permeability and the TA of the bone marrow in diabetics with critical limb ischemia (CLI).MethodsEighteen male rabbits were randomly assigned equally into an operation group with hindlimb ischemia and diabetes, a sham-operated group with diabetes only, and a control group. Dynamic contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (DCE-MRI) was performed on all rabbits at predetermined intervals (1, 5, 10, 15, 20, and 25 days post-surgery). The pharmacokinetic model was used to generate the permeability parameters, while the textural parameters were derived from the Ktrans map. Data analysis methods included the independent sample t-test, Mann-Whitney U test, repeated-measures analysis of variance, and Pearson correlation tests.ResultsThe Ktrans values reached a minimum on day 1 after ischemia induction, then gradually recovered, but remained lower than those of the sham-operated group. The volume fraction only showed a significant difference between the operation group and the sham-operated group on day 5 post-surgery, but not in the extravascular extracellular space volume fraction at all time points. A significantly reduced Ktrans on day 1, a decreased number of bone trabeculae (Tb.N), and the area of bone trabeculae (Tb.Ar), and an increased microvessel density on day 25 in the operation group compared with the sham-operated group were observed. At each time point, there was a discernible difference between the two groups in the mean value, mean of positive pixels, and sumAverage.ConclusionsThe early stages of diabetic bone marrow with CLI can be evaluated by DCE-MRI for microvascular permeability. Texture analysis based on DCE-MRI could act as an imaging discriminator and new radiological analysis tool for critical limb ischemia in diabetes mellitus.