TITLE: Unraveling the genetic and epigenetic landscape governing intramuscular fat deposition in rabbits: Insights and implications.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1016/j.fochms.2024.100222
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39290671

Intramuscular fat (IMF) content is a predominant factor recognized to affect rabbit meat quality, directly impacting flavor, juiciness, and consumer preference. Despite its significance, the major interplay of genetic and epigenetic factors regulating IMF in rabbits remains largely unexplored. This review sheds light on this critical knowledge gap, offering valuable insights and future directions. We delve into the potential role of established candidate genes from other livestock (e.g. PPARγ, FABP4, and SCD) in rabbits, while exploring the identified novel genes of IMF in rabbits. Furthermore, we explored the quantitative trait loci studies in rabbit IMF and genomic selection approaches for improving IMF content in rabbits. Beyond genetics, this review unveils the exciting realm of epigenetic mechanisms modulating IMF deposition. We explored the potential of DNA methylation patterns, histone modifications, and non-coding RNA-mediation as fingerprints for selecting rabbits with desirable IMF levels. Additionally, we explored the possibility of manipulating the epigenetic landscape through nutraceuticals interventions to promote favorable IMF depositions. By comprehensively deciphering the genomic and epigenetic terrain of rabbit intramuscular fat regulation, this study aims to assess the existing knowledge regarding the genetic and epigenetic factors that control the deposition of intramuscular fat in rabbits. By doing so, we identified gaps in the current research, and suggested potential areas for further investigation that would enhance the quality of rabbit meat. This can enable breeders to develop targeted breeding strategies, optimize nutrition, and create innovative interventions to enhance the quality of rabbit meat, meet consumer demands and increase market competitiveness.