TITLE: Dietary Supplementation of Microalgae and/or Nanominerals Mitigate the Negative Effects of Heat Stress in Growing Rabbits.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1007/s12011-023-03953-0
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/37964041

Heat stress (HS) is one of the most significant environmental factors that result in fluctuations and shrinkage in rabbit growth, health, and overall productivity. This study aims to investigate the effects of dietary mineral nanoparticles (selenium or zinc) and/or Spirulina platensis (SP) independently and in combination on stressed growing rabbits. A total of 180 weaned growing New Zealand White rabbits were included in this study and randomly divided into six dietary treatments. Rabbits received a basal diet (control group; CON group) or fortified with SP (1 g/kg diet), selenium nanoparticles (SeNPs, 50 mg/kg diet), zinc nanoparticles (ZnNPs, 100 mg/kg diet), and a mixture of SP and SeNPs (SPSeNPs) or SP and ZnNPs (SPZnNPs) groups for 8 weeks during summer conditions. The obtained results demonstrated a significant increase in the final body weight and weight gain (p < 0.05). Additionally, the feed conversion ratio was improved during the periods from 6 to 14 weeks in the treated rabbits compared to those in the CON group. Dietary supplements considerably improved (p < 0.05) the blood hematology (WBCs, Hb, RBCs, and Hct) and some carcass traits (liver weights and edible giblets). All dietary supplements significantly decreased serum levels of total glycerides (p < 0.0001), AST (p = 0.0113), ALT (p = 0.0013), creatinine (p = 0.0009), and uric acid (p = 0.0035) compared to the CON group. All treated groups (except ZnNPs) had lower values of total bilirubin and indirect bilirubin in a dose-dependent way when compared to the CON group. The values of IgA, IgG, and superoxide dismutase were significantly improved (p < 0.05) in all treated rabbits compared to the CON group. Compared with the CON group, the levels of T3 (p < 0.05) were significantly increased in all treated growing rabbits (except for the ZnNP group), while the serum cortisol, interferon-gamma (IFN-γ), malondialdehyde, and protein carbonyl were significantly decreased in the treated groups (p < 0.05). Dietary supplements sustained the changes in hepatic, renal, and cardiac impairments induced by HS in growing rabbits. Adding SP (1 g/kg diet) or SeNPs (50 mg/kg diet) in the diet, either individually or in combination, improved growth performance, blood picture, and immunity-antioxidant responses in stressed rabbits. Overall, these feed additives (SP, SeNPs, or their mixture) can be applied as an effective nutritional tool to reduce negative impacts of summer stress conditions, thereby maintaining the health status and improving the heat tolerance in growing rabbits.