TITLE: Burn Wound Healing Activity of Hydroxyethylcellulose Gels with Different Water Extracts Obtained from Various Medicinal Plants in Pseudomonas aeruginosa-Infected Rabbits.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/ijms25168990
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39201676

Burn injuries represent a significant problem in clinical practice due to the high risk of infection and the prolonged healing process. Recently, more attention has been given to natural remedies such as water extracts of various medicinal plants, which possess anti-inflammatory and wound healing properties. The aim of this study is to evaluate the efficacy and safety of Satureja montana L. and other water extracts in a burn wound model. The study involved male Californian rabbits (n = 52) divided into eight groups. Burn wounds were modeled on the animals and subsequently treated with gels based on Satureja montana L. and other water extracts. The reparative potential of the epidermis (assessed by Ki-67 expression), the state of local immunity (measured by the number of CD-45 cells), and the anti-inflammatory role of mast cells (measured by tryptase levels) were evaluated. Bacteriological and morphological studies were conducted. The most pronounced bactericidal, reparative, and immunostimulatory effects were observed after the treatment using a gel mixture of water extracts from Satureja montana L., Salvia sclarea, Coriandrum sativum L., and Lavandula angustifolia in equal proportions (1:1:1:1). The other gels also demonstrated high efficacy in treating burn wounds, especially when using a strain of Pseudomonas aeruginosa resistant to several antibiotics. Immunohistochemical studies showed a significant increase in the number of Ki-67-positive cells in the basal layer of the epidermis and a decrease in the number of CD-45-positive cells, indicating improved proliferative activity and reduced inflammation. This study confirms the hypothesis that the use of water extract mixtures significantly enhances the reparative potential, improves the immune response in the treatment of burns, and promotes wound healing. These findings pave the way for further research and the application of complex phytotherapeutic agents, specifically water extracts of medicinal plants containing phenols and antioxidants in burn wound therapy.