TITLE: A novel method for the percutaneous induction of myocardial infarction by occlusion of small coronary arteries in the rabbit.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1152/ajpheart.00657.2023
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38180449

Arrhythmic sudden cardiac death (SCD) is an important cause of mortality following myocardial infarction (MI). The rabbit has similar cardiac electrophysiology to humans and is therefore an important small animal model to study post-MI arrhythmias. The established approach of surgical coronary ligation results in thoracic adhesions that impede epicardial electrophysiological studies. Adhesions are absent following a percutaneously induced MI, which is also associated with reduced surgical morbidity and so represents a clear refinement of the approach. Percutaneous procedures have previously been described in large rabbits (3.5-5.5 kg). Here, we describe a novel method of percutaneous MI induction in smaller rabbits (2.5-3.5 kg) that are readily available commercially. New Zealand White rabbits (n = 51 males, 3.1 ± 0.3 kg) were anesthetized using isoflurane (1.5-3%) and underwent either a percutaneous MI procedure involving microcatheter tip deployment (≤1.5 Fr, 5 mm), coronary ligation surgery, or a sham procedure. Electrocardiography (ECG) recordings were used to confirm ST-segment elevation indicating coronary occlusion. Blood samples (1 and 24 h) were taken for cardiac troponin I (cTnI) levels. Ejection fraction (EF) was measured at 6-8 wk. Rabbits were then euthanized (Euthatal) and hearts were processed for magnetic resonance imaging and histology. Mortality rates were similar in both groups. Scar volume, cTnI, and EF were similar between both MI groups and significantly different from their respective sham controls. Thus, percutaneous coronary occlusion by microcatheter tip deployment is feasible in rabbits (2.5-3.5 kg) and produces an MI with similar characteristics to surgical ligation with lower procedural trauma and without epicardial adhesions.NEW & NOTEWORTHY Surgical coronary ligation is the standard technique to induce myocardial infarction (MI) in rabbits but is associated with procedural trauma and the generation of thoracic adhesions. Percutaneous coronary occlusion avoids these shortcomings and is established in pigs but has only been applicable to large rabbits because of a mismatch between the equipment used and target vessel size. Here, we describe a new scalable approach to percutaneous MI induction that is safe and effective in 2.5-3.5-kg rabbits.