TITLE: Silver and gold nanoparticles as a novel approach to fight Sarcoptic mange in rabbits.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-60736-w
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38724594

Various kinds of pets have been known to contract the ectoparasite Sarcoptes scabiei. Current acaricides are becoming less effective because of the resistance developed by the mite besides their adverse effects on the general activity and reproductive performance of domestic pets. For this reason, the present study aims to discover a novel and safe approach using silver and gold nanoparticles to fight Sarcoptic mange in rabbits as well as to explain their mechanism of action. 15 pet rabbits with clinical signs of Sarcoptic mange that were confirmed by the microscopic examination were used in our study. All rabbits used in this study were assessed positive for the presence of different developing stages of S. scabiei. Three groups of rabbits (n = 5) were used as follows: group (1) didn't receive any treatment, and group (2 and 3) was treated with either AgNPs or GNPs, respectively. Both nanoparticles were applied daily on the affected skin areas via a dressing and injected subcutaneously once a week for 2 weeks at a dose of 0.5 mg/kg bwt. Our results revealed that all rabbits were severely infested and took a mean score = 3. The skin lesions in rabbits that didn't receive any treatments progressed extensively and took a mean score = of 4. On the other hand, all nanoparticle-treated groups displayed marked improvement in the skin lesion and took an average score of 0-1. All NPs treated groups showed remarkable improvement in the microscopic pictures along with mild iNOS, TNF-α, and Cox-2 expression. Both nanoparticles could downregulate the m-RNA levels of IL-6 and IFγ and upregulate IL-10 and TGF-1β genes to promote skin healing. Dressing rabbits with both NPs didn't affect either liver and kidney biomarkers or serum Ig levels indicating their safety. Our residual analysis detected AgNPs in the liver of rabbits but did not detect any residues of GNPs in such organs. We recommend using GNPs as an alternative acaricide to fight rabbit mange.