TITLE: Biomechanical analysis of cadaver rabbit Achilles tendons after full transection and suture: Comparison of U-Tang 4-strand with the cross-locked version of U-Tang 4-strand suture technique.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2024.e38215
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39381216

IntroductionTendon injures rank as the second most common hand injuries, and unsatisfactory repair can significantly impact a patient's everyday life. Over the years, various suture techniques have been studied in the pursuit of finding the optimal repair method. The ideal tendon repair should achieve maximum strength, while being easy to perform and minimizing tissue trauma. This study aims to compare the mechanical properties of the cross-locked U-Tang 4-strand suture to its unmodified version, the U-Tang 4-strand suture, to assess which technique offers greater repair strength.MethodsSixteen Achilles tendons from New Zealand White rabbits were randomly assigned to one of two suture technique groups; an original U-Tang 4-strand suture or a cross-locked U-Tang 4-strand suture, both performed using a 4-0 Supramid thread. The specimens were tested in uniaxial tension after a preconditioning phase. Cross-sectional area, load until failure, gap formation, stiffness, elastic modulus, and failure stress were determined.ResultsThe standard U-Tang 4-strand suture withstood a maximum force of 25.48 ± 6.06 N, while the cross-locked version endured 33.90 ± 6.09 N. This indicates that the modified version demonstrated significantly greater strength (p = 0.021). The elastic modulus of the cross-locked U-Tang 4-strand suture (0.02 ± 0.003 MPa) was significantly higher than that of the original version (0.01 ± 0.006 MPa) (p = 0.028). No significant differences were observed regarding the cross-sectional area, load at 2 mm gap formation, stiffness and failure stress.ConclusionEmploying the cross-locked U-Tang 4-strand suture results in a significantly greater maximum force and elastic modulus compared to the original U-Tang 4-strand suture, utilizing the same thread and number of strands and knots. Therefore, the cross-locking version provides an alternative for achieving more stable initial repair strength.