TITLE: Effect of Topical Losartan in the Treatment of Established Corneal Fibrosis in Rabbits.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1167/tvst.13.8.22
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39133495

PurposeThe purpose of this study was to evaluate the safety and efficacy of topical losartan in the therapeutic treatment of established corneal scaring fibrosis at 1 month after alkali burn in rabbits.MethodsStandardized alkali burns were performed in 1 eye of 24 rabbits with 0.75N NaOH for 15 seconds. Corneas were allowed to heal and develop scaring of the cornea for 1 month. Twelve eyes per group were treated with 50 µL of topical 0.8 mg/mL losartan in balanced salt solution (BSS), pH 7.0, and 12 eyes were treated with vehicle BSS 6 times per day. Six corneas were analyzed at 1 week or 1 month in each group. Standardized slit lamp photographs were obtained at the end point for each cornea and opacity was quantitated using ImageJ. Corneoscleral rims were cryofixed in optimum cutting temperature (OCT) solution and combined duplex immunohistochemistry for myofibroblast marker alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), mesenchymal cell marker vimentin, and TUNEL assay for apoptosis was performed on all corneas.ResultsTopical losartan was effective in the treatment of established stromal fibrosis following alkali burn injury to the rabbit cornea. Stromal myofibroblast density was decreased and stromal cell apoptosis was increased (included both α-SMA-positive myofibroblasts and α-SMA-negative, vimentin-positive cells) at both 1 week and 1 month in the topical losartan-treated compared with vehicle-treated groups.ConclusionsTopical losartan is effective in the treatment of established stromal fibrosis in rabbits. Most myofibroblasts disappear from the stroma within the first month of losartan treatment. Longer treatment with topical losartan is needed to allow time for corneal fibroblast regeneration of the epithelial basement membrane (in coordination with epithelial cells) and the removal of disordered extracellular matrix produced by myofibroblasts.