TITLE: Investigation of the Optimal Immunization Dose and Protective Efficacy of an Attenuated and Marker M. bovis-Bovine Herpesvirus Type 1 Combined Vaccine in Rabbits.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/ani14050748
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38473133

Bovine respiratory disease (BRD) is one of the most common diseases in the cattle industry; it is a globally prevalent multifactorial infection primarily caused by viral and bacterial coinfections. In China, Mycoplasma bovis (M. bovis) and bovine herpesvirus type 1 (BoHV-1) are the most notable pathogens associated with BRD. Our previous study attempted to combine the two vaccines and conducted a preliminary investigation of their optimal antigenic ratios. Based on this premise, the research extended its investigation by administering varying vaccine doses in a rabbit model to identify the most effective immunization dosage. After immunization, all rabbits in other immunization dose groups had a normal rectal temperature without obvious clinical symptoms. Furthermore, assays performed on the samples collected from immunized rabbits indicated that there were increased humoral and cellular immunological reactions. Moreover, the histological analysis of the lungs showed that immunized rabbits had more intact lung tissue than their unimmunized counterparts after the challenge. Additionally, there appears to be a positive correlation between the protective efficacy and the immunization dose. In conclusion, the different immunization doses of the attenuated and marker M. bovis HB150 and BoHV-1 gG-/tk- combined vaccine were clinically safe in rabbits; the mix of 2.0 × 108 CFU of M. bovis HB150 and 2.0 × 106 TCID50 BoHV-1 gG-/tk- strain was most promising due to its highest humoral and cellular immune responses and a more complete morphology of the lung tissue compared with others. These findings determined the optimal immunization dose of the attenuated and marker M. bovis HB150 and BoHV-1 gG-/tk- combined vaccine, laying a foundation for its clinical application.