TITLE: Molecular time estimates for the Lagomorpha diversification.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0307380
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39241029

Despite their importance as members of the Glires group, lagomorph diversification processes have seldom been studied using molecular data. Notably, only a few phylogenetic studies have included most of the examined lagomorph lineages. Previous studies that included a larger sample of taxa and markers used nonconservative tests to support the branches of their proposed phylogeny. The objective of this study was to test the monophyly of families and genera of lagomorphs and to evaluate the group diversification process. To that end, this work expanded the sampling of markers and taxa in addition to implementing the bootstrap, a more rigorous statistical test to measure branch support; hence, a more robust phylogeny was recovered. Our supermatrix included five mitochondrial genes and 14 nuclear genes for eighty-eight taxa, including three rodent outgroups. Our maximum likelihood tree showed that all tested genera and both families, Leporidae and Ochotonidae, were recovered as monophyletic. In the Ochotona genus, the subgenera Conothoa and Pika, but not Ochotona, were recovered as monophyletic. Six calibration points based on fossils were used to construct a time tree. A calibration test was performed (via jackknife) by removing one calibration at a time and estimating divergence times for each set. The diversification of the main groups of lagomorphs indicated that the origin of the order's crown group was dated from the beginning of the Palaeogene. Our diversification time estimates for Lagomorpha were compared with those for the largest mammalian order, i.e., rodent lineages in Muroidea. According to our time-resolved phylogenetic tree, the leporids underwent major radiation by evolving a completely new morphospace-larger bodies and an efficient locomotor system-that enabled them to cover wide foraging areas and outrun predators more easily than rodents and pikas.