TITLE: Thoughtful or distant farmer: Exploring the influence of human-animal relationships on rabbit stress, behaviour, and emotional responses in two distinct living environments.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1017/awf.2024.54
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39600355

Both the nature of the human-animal relationship (HAR) and housing conditions significantly impact the welfare of farmed animals. To evaluate the influence of HAR on the behaviour, emotions and stress of rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus) in two distinct outdoor living environments, we allocated 144 young rabbits to four groups (CPX-H, CPX-N, SPL-H, SPL-N) differing in the living environments (CPX for complex, and SPL for simple). The treatment by human (H) involved daily provision of additional food resources and stroking (thoughtful farmer). It commenced at 49 days of age and lasted for 16 days. N groups did not receive the treatment (distant farmer). The rabbits were observed between 48 and 73 days of age. Their behavioural responses to human presence were evaluated at 48 and 68 days using Qualitative Behaviour Assessment (QBA) and scan sampling. A set of tests was conducted at 68 days of age to assess their reactions to a novel object and human presence. Stress levels were measured by analysing corticosterone concentrations in their hair. Rabbits in the SPL environment spent significantly more time near the novel object than those in the CPX environment (24.7 vs 17.2%). Additionally, rabbits in the H treatment group spent more time near the human than those in the N treatment group (28.2 vs 17.1%) and accepted more strokes (90.2 vs 45.9%). Following the HAR treatment, rabbits in the H group were significantly more likely to be described as 'Affectionate/Interested' than those in the N treatment. Rabbits in the N treatment were described as 'Indifferent' significantly more in the SPL environment. However, there were no significant differences in hair corticosterone concentrations between the groups. These findings indicate that rabbits' responses are influenced by both their living environment and the quality of their relationship with humans. Encouraging positive interactions with animals may enhance their welfare and facilitate daily care from farmers.