TITLE: WBi-YOLOSF: improved feature pyramid network for aquatic real-time target detection under the artificial rabbits optimization.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-68878-7
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39097637

As the pillar industry of coastal areas, aquaculture needs artificial intelligence technology to promote economic development. To realize the automation of the aquaculture industry, this paper proposes a new underwater object detection network: WBi-YOLOSF. It realizes the automatic classification and detection of aquatic products, improves the production efficiency of the aquaculture industry, and promotes its economic development. This paper creates an image dataset containing 15 aquatic products to lay the data foundation for model training. In the data preprocessing part, an underwater image enhancement algorithm is proposed to improve the quality of the data set effectively. Aiming at the problem of high false detection rate and missed detection rate of underwater dense small targets, a new data enhancement method was proposed to improve the training set's data quality comprehensively. Inspired by the weighted bidirectional feature pyramid network, this paper proposes a new feature extraction network: AU-BiFPN, which solves the gradient problem caused by the network hierarchy's deepening on enhancing the network's multi-scale feature fusion. The AU-BiFPN network structure is embedded into the YOLO series network framework, significantly improving the basic network's feature extraction and feature fusion ability and dramatically improving the prediction accuracy without affecting the network inference speed. Here, the swarm intelligence algorithm is introduced to optimize the model hyperparameters, accelerating the convergence speed of model training and significantly reducing the computational cost. At the same time, the model's accuracy is improved by a cliff. In addition, the Funnel Activation is introduced in the network's backbone, and the simple, parameter-free attention module is integrated, effectively improving the accuracy and speed of the model prediction. Ablation and comparison experiments show the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed model. Verified by the mean average precision and frame rate evaluation indicators, the experimental results of the WBi-YOLOSF target detection network can reach 0.982 and 203 frames per second, which are 1.4% and five frames per second higher than the network with the second score. In summary, this method can quickly and accurately identify aquatic products, realize real-time target detection of aquatic products, and lay the foundation for developing an aquaculture automation system.