TITLE: Bone Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cell-Laden Nanocomposite Scaffolds Enhance Bone Regeneration in Rabbit Critical-Size Segmental Bone Defect Model.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/jfb15030066
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38535259

Bone regeneration poses a significant challenge in the field of tissue engineering, prompting ongoing research to explore innovative strategies for effective bone healing. The integration of stem cells and nanomaterial scaffolds has emerged as a promising approach, offering the potential to enhance regenerative outcomes. This study focuses on the application of a stem cell-laden nanomaterial scaffold designed for bone regeneration in rabbits. The in vivo study was conducted on thirty-six healthy skeletally mature New Zealand white rabbits that were randomly allocated into six groups. Group A was considered the control, wherein a 15 mm critical-sized defect was created and left as such without any treatment. In group B, this defect was filled with a polycaprolactone-hydroxyapatite (PCL + HAP) scaffold, whereas in group C, a PCL + HAP-carboxylated multiwalled carbon nanotube (PCL + HAP + MWCNT-COOH) scaffold was used. In group D, a PCL + HAP + MWCNT-COOH scaffold was used with local injection of bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2) on postoperative days 30, 45, and 60. The rabbit bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (rBMSCs) were seeded onto the PCL + HAP + MWCNT-COOH scaffold by the centrifugal method. In group E, an rBMSC-seeded PCL + HAP + MWCNT-COOH scaffold was used along with the local injection of rBMSC on postoperative days 7, 14, and 21. For group F, in addition to the treatment given to group E, BMP-2 was administered locally on postoperative days 30, 45, and 60. Gross observations, radiological observation, scanning electron microscopic assessment, and histological evaluation study showed that group F displayed the best healing properties, followed by group E, group D, group C, and B. Group A showed no healing with ends blunting minimal fibrous tissue. Incorporating growth factor BMP-2 in tissue-engineered rBMSC-loaded nanocomposite PCL + HAP + MWCNT-COOH construct can augment the osteoinductive and osteoconductive properties, thereby enhancing the healing in a critical-sized bone defect. This novel stem cell composite could prove worthy in the treatment of non-union and delayed union fractures in the near future.