TITLE: Oviductal extracellular matrix hydrogels enhance in vitro culture of rabbit embryos and reduce deficiencies during assisted reproductive technologies.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-77583-4
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39528559

In vitro embryo culture often falls short of mimicking the physiological dynamism occurring in the reproductive tract, prompting developmental plasticity in mammalian embryos with consequential genotypic and phenotypic deviations. Recent research highlights the potential of biological derivatives in in vitro culture to mitigate these effects, being the extracellular matrix (ECM) one of the most important components in retaining structural and biological signals derived from the native source tissue. Current bioengineering techniques could provide ECM-based biomaterials mimicking the native environment and offering optimal embryonic development. Rabbit oviducts (n = 24) were decellularized and solubilized to create tissue-specific ECM (OviECM) hydrogels. Following physicochemical characterization, these hydrogels were applied as coatings for the in vitro culture of two-cell embryos over 48 h, along with embryos cultured under In vitro control conditions (n = 218/group), which were subsequently transferred to recipient females. A subset of embryos was recovered on day 6 for transcriptomic analysis (n = 75-80/group), while the remaining embryos were used to assess implantation and birth rates. Rabbit weights were monitored over 20 weeks post-delivery, with blood tests conducted at weeks 8 and 20. Bayesian inference methods were used for statistical analysis. Differences were considered relevant if P ≥ 0.8 (80%). No differences in embryo development and morphology were detected between the OviECM coating and In vitro control conditions. However, embryos cultured on these coatings exhibited upregulation of pathways involved in antigen presentation and immune system activation, as well as, increased cellular response to external stimulus and intracellular protein transport. The implantation and live birth rates were significantly higher in the coating group than in the In vitro control group (30.8% vs. 26.1% and 21.2% vs. 18.1%, respectively). During the first 20 weeks of life, the animals from the coating group showed higher weights than the In vitro control group P0 > 0.8. The animals of both experimental groups showed normal blood parameters. Implementation of OviECM coatings allows for improving in vitro conditions and decreases postnatal phenotypic deviations after assisted reproductive technology (ART). This study could initiate a new embryo culture techniques era to guarantee that ART is utilized in the most efficient and safest possible practice.