TITLE: Osteoimmunological Principles Adapted to Achieve Mechanically Superior Posterolateral Fusion in a New Zealand White Rabbit Model Using Antigen-Coated, Electrospun Beta-Tricalcium Phosphate.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.7759/cureus.62781
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39036124

Introduction Triggering the immune system via antigenic stimulation at the time of spinal fusion surgery may enhance bone morphogenesis and result in successful bony arthrodesis. We sought to demonstrate that bone morphogenesis could be enhanced via antigenic immunologic stimulation of a surgical fusion site. Methods New Zealand white rabbits underwent non-instrumented posterolateral fusion of L5-6 with implantation of either an immunologically activated graft (inert beta-tricalcium phosphate) or harvested autograft. Fusion was evaluated using plain radiographs, micro-computed tomography (CT), mechanical palpation, and biomechanical testing. The final evaluation was carried out at 12 weeks postoperatively. Results Eight rabbits received immunologically activated grafts; 10 received autografts and served as historical controls. Fusion rates were identical between groups (both 50%). Radiographs and micro CT of the fusion mass showed no significant difference between groups, and both showed good incorporation of the transverse processes into the fusion masses with radiographic evidence confirming trabeculation and bone remodeling. However, mechanical testing of the fusion sites showed superior fusion strength in the rabbits that received immunologically activated grafts, approaching a factor of two on flexion/extension, lateral bending, and axial rotation. Little to no graft material was appreciable in the non-fused antigen-treated specimens. Conclusions There is a long-standing need for a graft material that can replace autograft bone, due to the negative clinical consequences and financial costs pertaining to autologous bone harvesting. No allograft bone substitute to date has been able to reliably replicate the success of harvested autograft bone. This study suggests that immunological enhancement of inert beta-tricalcium phosphate can potentially be a substitute for allograft bone that can meet and even exceed the success of harvested autograft bone.