TITLE: Seroprevalence of Neospora caninum in pet cats, dogs and rabbits from urban areas of Poland.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s12917-024-03894-3
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38297328

BackgroundNeospora caninum (N. caninum) has a broad intermediate host range and might cause multisystemic lesions in various species of animals. Dogs are both intermediate and definitive hosts of the parasite and play a crucial role in the horizontal transmission of this protozoan to other animals. Cats and rabbits could be sensitive to infection with N. caninum, however, clinical symptoms and the exact route of infection in these species are unknown. The epidemiology of N. caninum in cats and rabbits has been barely researched, and there is no published record of the seroprevalence of N. caninum infection in these species in Poland. Thus, the present study aimed to determine the frequency of seroreagents for N. caninum within pet dogs, cats and rabbits from urban areas of Poland and to identify possible risk factors for these animals.ResultsIn total, serum samples from 184 cats (Felis catus), 203 dogs (Canis familiaris) and 70 rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus) were used in the study. The seroprevalence of anti-N. caninum antibodies in dogs and cats reached 1.0% (2/203; 95% CI: 0.3-3.5) and 3.3% (6/184; 95% CI: 1.5-6.9), respectively. No significant differences in seroprevalence regarding age group, gender, symptoms or sampling location were found. All 70 samples from pet rabbits were negative for anti-N. caninum antibodies.ConclusionsThe seroprevalence rates of N. caninum in dogs and cats in the present study were low, however, our results confirmed N. caninum circulates among dog and cat populations in Poland, and neosporosis should be included in the differential diagnosis of neuro-muscular disorders in these species. This is the first serological survey of N. caninum in European pet cats and rabbits. The role of pet rabbits in N. caninum epidemiology and circulation in Poland is marginal.