TITLE: Rabbits as a Reservoir of Multidrug-Resistant Escherichia coli: Clonal Lineages and Public Health Impact.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/antibiotics13040376
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38667052

Escherichia coli, including extended-spectrum β-lactamases (ESBL)-producing strains, poses a global health threat due to multidrug resistance, compromising food safety and environmental integrity. In industrial settings, rabbits raised for meat have the highest consumption of antimicrobial agents compared to other food-producing animals. The European Union is facing challenges in rabbit farming as rabbit consumption declines and antibiotic-resistant strains of E. coli cause enteric diseases. The aim of this study was to investigate the antibiotic resistance profile, genetic diversity, and biofilm formation in cefotaxime-resistant E. coli strains isolated from twenty rabbit farms in Northern Portugal to address the effect of the pressing issue of antibiotic resistance in the rabbit farming industry. Resistance to critically antibiotics was observed, with high levels of resistance to several categories, such as tetracycline, ampicillin, aztreonam, and streptomycin. However, all isolates were susceptible to cefoxitin and imipenem. Multidrug resistance was common, with strains showing resistance to all antibiotics tested. The blaCTX-M variants (blaCTX-3G and blaCTX-M9), followed by the tetracycline resistance genes, were the most frequent resistance genes found. ST10 clones exhibiting significant resistance to various categories of antibiotics and harboring different resistance genes were detected. ST457 and ST2325 were important sequence types due to their association with ESBL-E. coli isolates and have been widely distributed in a variety of environments and host species. The strains evaluated showed a high capacity for biofilm formation, which varied when they were grouped by the number of classes of antibiotics to which they showed resistance (i.e., seven different classes of antibiotics, six classes of antibiotics, and three/four/five classes of antibiotics). The One Health approach integrates efforts to combat antimicrobial resistance in rabbit farming through interdisciplinary collaboration of human, animal, and environmental health. Our findings are worrisome and raise concerns. The extensive usage of antibiotics in rabbit farming emphasizes the urgent need to establish active surveillance systems.