TITLE: Serum Metabolomics and NF-κB Pathway Analysis Revealed the Antipyretic Mechanism of Ellagic Acid on LPS-Induced Fever in Rabbits.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/metabo14080407
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39195502

Fever is one of the most common clinical conditions and is characterized by pyrogenic infection, malignancy, inflammation, and tissue damage, among others. Ellagic acid (EA) can inhibit the expression of related proteins on the pathway by blocking the nuclear factor kappa-B(NF-κB) signaling pathway, inhibit the levels of pro-inflammatory factors interleukin-1β(IL-1β), interleukin-6(IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-α(TNF-α), increase the level of anti-inflammatory factor IL-10, and effectively alleviate inflammatory symptoms. In addition, EA can also reduce the levels of malondialdehyde(MDA) and nitric oxide(NO) in the body, increase the activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione (GSH), and catalase(CAT), scavenge oxidative free radicals, inhibit lipid oxidation, and achieve antipyretic and anti-inflammatory effects. The purpose of this study was to establish the relationship between EA and various inflammatory markers, such as TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, prostaglandin E2(PGE2), and cyclic adenosine monophosphate(cAMP), and clarify the mechanism of the cyclooxidase-2(COX-2)/NF-κB signaling pathway. Combined with the metabolomics analysis, our study revealed the effects of EA on multiple endogenous biomarkers, reflecting the characteristics of a multi-component, multi-target, and multi-pathway mechanism. Compared to lipopolysaccharide (LPS)- treated animals, subsequent administration of EA significantly lowered the LPS-induced rectal temperature increase (p p p p p p 2 levels (p p p p 2, and cAMP. The levels of propionic acid, pyridine, and L-valine were up-regulated by EA, which inhibited the expression of MDA, IL-1β, and TNF-α and increased the activity of GSH. The levels of inositol, urea, and 2-monopalmitin were down-regulated by EA, which inhibited the expression of MDA, IL-1β, and TNF-α, increased the activity of SOD and GSH, reduced the inflammatory response, and alleviated the oxidative stress state. Combined with the results of the metabolic pathway analysis, we suggest that the pathways of the galactose metabolism, synthesis and degradation of ketone bodies, as well as ascorbic acid and aldehyde acid metabolism are closely related to the antipyretic and anti-inflammatory effects of EA. Our study established the relationship between EA and various inflammatory markers, such as TNF-α, IL-6, IL-1β, PGE2, and cAMP, and clarified the mechanism of the COX-2/NF-κB signaling pathway. Combined with the metabolomics analysis, our study revealed the effects of EA on multiple endogenous biomarkers, reflecting the characteristics of a multi-component, multi-target, and multi-pathway mechanism.