TITLE: Development of a novel approach for restoration of the meniscus using silk-elastin in a rabbit meniscus injury model.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s12891-024-07675-9
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39010063

BackgroundLimited healing potential of the meniscus remains a burden for the successful repair of meniscus injuries in the orthopaedic fields. Silk-elastin (SE) is a novel recombinant protein with favorable properties for wound healing. This proof-of-concept study aimed to investigate the therapeutic effect of silk-elastin in a rabbit meniscal defect model.MethodsA migration assay using rabbit meniscus and synovial cells with various concentrations of SE in a culture medium was conducted to investigate the mechanism of meniscal healing by SE. Additionally, cylindrical defects with a 1.5 mm diameter were created at the anterior horn of the medial meniscus of rabbits. The animals were divided into three groups: 1) the Blank group; defect only, 2) the Col I group; implantation of type I atelocollagen sponge, and 3) the SE group; implantation of SE (150 mg/ml) sponge. Whole medial menisci were harvested at 4, 8, 12, and 24 weeks after surgery. Histological analyses including immunohistochemical staining were performed to assess meniscal healing.ResultsIn vitro study, Migration assay demonstrated a significantly higher number of migrated cells only in synovial cells. Especially, the SE concentration of 10 µg/mL demonstrated the highest number of migrated cells compared with other concentrations. In vivo study, the SE group exhibited significantly higher Ishida scores than other groups at all time points. Furthermore, the SE group showed higher synovial coverage scores than the Col I group at 4 and 8 weeks. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated higher type II collagen staining in the SE group compared to other groups at 12 weeks. Implanted SE was efficiently replaced by safranin-O staining positive tissue within 8 weeks.ConclusionsSE could effectively repair a meniscal defect by inducing coverage of synovial cells. SE has the potential to be a useful material for meniscal repair.