TITLE: Cecal metabolomics of 2 divergently selected rabbit lines revealed microbial mechanisms correlated to intramuscular fat deposition.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1093/jas/skae339
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39497598

The gastrointestinal microbiota plays a key role in the host physiology and health through a complex host-microbiota co-metabolism. Metabolites produced by microbial metabolism can travel through the bloodstream to reach distal organs and affect their function, ultimately influencing the development of relevant production traits such as meat quality. Meat quality is a complex trait made up of a number of characteristics and intramuscular fat content (IMF) is considered to be one of the most important parameters. In this study, 52 rabbits from 2 lines divergently selected for IMF (high-IMF (H) and low-IMF (L) lines) were used to perform an untargeted metabolomic analysis of their cecal content, with the aim to obtain information on genetically determined microbial metabolism related to IMF. A large, correlated response to selection was found in their cecal metabolome composition. Partial least squares discriminant analysis was used to identify the pathways differentiating the lines, which showed a classification accuracy of 99%. On the other hand, 2 linear partial least squares analyses were performed, one for each line, to extract evidence on the specific pathways associated with IMF deposition within each line, which showed predictive abilities (estimated using the Q2) of approximately 60%. The most relevant pathways differentiating the lines were those related to amino acids (aromatic, branched-chain, and gamma-glutamyl), secondary bile acids, and purines. The higher content of secondary bile acids in the L-line was related to greater lipid absorption, while the differences found in purines suggested different fermentation activities, which could be related to greater nitrogen utilization and energy efficiency in the L-line. The linear analyses showed that lipid metabolism had a greater relative importance for IMF deposition in the L-line, whereas a more complex microbial metabolism was associated with the H-line. The lysophospholipids and gamma-glutamyl amino acids were associated with IMF in both lines; the nucleotide and secondary bile acid metabolisms were mostly associated in the H-line; and the long-chain and branched-chain fatty acids were mostly associated in the L-line. A metabolic signature consisting of 2 secondary bile acids and 2 protein metabolites was found with 88% classification accuracy, pointing to the interaction between lipid absorption and protein metabolism as a relevant driver of the microbiome activity influencing IMF.