TITLE: Insights into Actin Isoform-Specific Interactions with Myosin via Computational Analysis.
YEAR: 2024
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/molecules29132992
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/38998944

Actin, which plays a crucial role in cellular structure and function, interacts with various binding proteins, notably myosin. In mammals, actin is composed of six isoforms that exhibit high levels of sequence conservation and structural similarity overall. As a result, the selection of actin isoforms was considered unimportant in structural studies of their binding with myosin. However, recent high-resolution structural research discovered subtle structural differences in the N-terminus of actin isoforms, suggesting the possibility that each actin isoform may engage in specific interactions with myosin isoforms. In this study, we aimed to explore this possibility, particularly by understanding the influence of different actin isoforms on the interaction with myosin 7A. First, we compared the reported actomyosin structures utilizing the same type of actin isoforms as the high-resolution filamentous skeletal α-actin (3.5 Å) structure elucidated using cryo-EM. Through this comparison, we confirmed that the diversity of myosin isoforms leads to differences in interaction with the actin N-terminus, and that loop 2 of the myosin actin-binding sites directly interacts with the actin N-terminus. Subsequently, with the aid of multiple sequence alignment, we observed significant variations in the length of loop 2 across different myosin isoforms. We predicted that these length differences in loop 2 would likely result in structural variations that would affect the interaction with the actin N-terminus. For myosin 7A, loop 2 was found to be very short, and protein complex predictions using skeletal α-actin confirmed an interaction between loop 2 and the actin N-terminus. The prediction indicated that the positively charged residues present in loop 2 electrostatically interact with the acidic patch residues D24 and D25 of actin subdomain 1, whereas interaction with the actin N-terminus beyond this was not observed. Additionally, analyses of the actomyosin-7A prediction models generated using various actin isoforms consistently yielded the same results regardless of the type of actin isoform employed. The results of this study suggest that the subtle structural differences in the N-terminus of actin isoforms are unlikely to influence the binding structure with short loop 2 myosin 7A. Our findings are expected to provide a deeper understanding for future high-resolution structural binding studies of actin and myosin.