TITLE: Unveiling the effect of chia seeds and matcha tea on growth performance, metabolism, carcass characteristics, and gene expression on New Zealand rabbits.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-024-82175-3
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/40355510

Novel of hematopoietic system and hepatic system under the usage of antioxidant plants such as chia seeds and matcha green tea were critical sites in this study which promoted by crucial health of New-Zealand white (NZW) rabbits as a model for mammalia and eukaryotic cell. Our study investigated the effect of chia seeds and matcha green tea on the liver. Eighteen NZW rabbits average weighed of 547.08gm with an average age of 30 days were divided into three groups, control, chia seeds powder group 0.150gm/L, and matcha green tea group 0.075 gm/L. The weekly treatments were weighted from weaning age to marketing age about nine weeks were the experimental period. At the end of this experiment, we studied growth performance, metabolism, carcass characteristics, and some gene expression related to the growth factor family, hepatic metabolism, lipid profile, iron storage, and one of the endoplasmic reticulum stress receptors of NZW rabbits. The data in this study reported that final body weight increased significantly (P < 0.05) in the matcha group compared to the control, carcass trait and dressing parts were increased significantly in comparison to control. However, Red blood cell count, hemoglobin concentration, and ferritin increased in matcha groups in comparison to control while there is no difference significant between chia and control. Cortisol and insulin in plasma were decreased significantly in chia and matcha compared to control. IRP1, APOA2, IGF1, A1BG, and SLC27A5 were up-regulated in matcha tea groups compared to control while, SLC27A5 was down-regulated in chia groups and Leptin and GRP78 were showed down-regulated in chia and matcha groups. This study offers new insights into the role of chia seeds and matcha tea in physiological and biological processes in the liver and achieved a vital and healthy biological body and reduces the incidence of cancer.