TITLE: Potential Therapeutic Effect of ZnO/CuO Nanocomposite as an Acaricidal, Immunostimulant, and Antioxidant in Rabbits.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/vetsci12040333
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/40284835

The present study aimed to identify a safe and novel approach using zinc oxide/copper oxide nanocomposites (AZ) to enhance growth parameters, immunity, and fight Sarcoptic mange in vitro and in vivo in rabbits. In vitro: the acaricidal activity of AZ was assessed at concentrations of AZ-25: 2.5% w/w AZ/molasses, AZ-125: 12.5% w/w AZ/molasses, and controls (normal saline, molasses, and Ivermectin) every hour for seven hours under a stereoscopic microscope. In vivo: involved 40 rabbits (10 replicates/group). G1 served as the control negative group (normal un-infected rabbits), G2 served as the control negative group (infected rabbits), the animals in the G3 group were given a combination of AZ (40 mg/kg body weight (BW)) and molasses (5 mg/mL), and G4 served as the control to the vehicle; receiving molasses 8 mL/kg BW twice weekly for 6 weeks. Blood, serum, and tissue samples were collected at the middle and the end of the trial. AZ was made using the sonication sol-gel method. X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were performed to confirm the crystal structure, purity, particle size, and oxidation states. AZ showed immunostimulant, acaricidal, and antioxidant effects with normal tissue histological structure and low tissue residual levels. Additionally, there were improvements in blood interferon-gamma, immunoglobulin (Ig) M, IgG, phagocytic activity, phagocytic index, globulin, and total protein in the AZ group. The XRD patterns of AZ were coordinated by XRD reference codes Crystallography Open Database (COD): 9016326 for Tenorite (CuO) and by XRD reference COD: 9004179 for Zincite (ZnO). The CuO and ZnO crystal sizes were 21.87 Å and 24.89 Å, respectively. The XPS spectra indicated the presence of Cu as Cu (II) and Zn as ZnO.OH and ZnO. In conclusion, AZ exhibited antioxidant, acaricidal, and immunostimulant effects, with mild residues in the brain, liver, and kidney tissues, while maintaining a normal histological structure of tissues.