TITLE: Effect of oral administration of <i>Myrtus communis</i> extract on reducing the negative impacts of feed contaminated with mycotoxins on productive performance and some blood characteristics in local male rabbits.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.5455/ovj.2025.v15.i3.13
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/40276170

BackgroundMycotoxins, secondary metabolic compounds released by bacteria, negatively impact the environment, animals, and people. Extraction from Myrtus communis may be used instead of antibiotics to treat microbial infections.AimThis study investigated the ability of a medicinal plant extract (M. communis) to reduce the harmful effect of mycotoxin on the productivity and health status of male rabbits. In addition, it improved the productivity and health status of male rabbits and detected Aflatoxin-B1 residues in kidney and liver tissues using the High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) technique.MethodsTwenty-four local male rabbits, aged 5-6 months with a mean body weight of 1393 ± 20 g, were uncontaminated in three groups based on body weight, each consisting of eight rabbits. The initial control group was provided with a basal diet uncontaminated (C); the second group was given a diet contaminated with state the concentration of mycotoxins in diet mycotoxins (T1); the third group feeds on the same diet as the second group received a diet contaminated with mycotoxins and was treated with M. communis at a dosage of 250 mg/head orally (T2).ResultsA significant increase in body weight was observed in the T2 that was treated with M. communis after 2, 4, and 6 weeks; the feed intake showed that in the first 2 and 4 weeks, there was a significant increase in T2 compared with C and T1 in all groups of the experiment with no significant change in 6 and 8 weeks. Regarding the blood parameters white blood cells (WBCs), red blood cells (RBCs), Hemoglobin (Hb), and platelets, there was no change among groups; creatinine increased significantly in the T1 and T2 groups, whereas the total protein was unchanged. The liver enzymes AST enzyme increased in the T1 compared with the T2 group, representing improved liver functions. However, alanine aminotransferase was within the average level for the three groups; after detection of AFB1 in the kidney and liver by HPLC, the concentration of AFB1 in T1, T2 was 8.6,1.4 in the kidney tissue, 10.5, 1.6 in also liver T1, T2, respectively, while the control group was under detectable level.ConclusionIn conclusion, giving M. communis extract orally to rabbits can play an important role in improving production performance and reducing the toxic effects of mycotoxins. It was suggested that the activity of this organ to eliminate the mycotoxins by the M. communis action. In conclusion, giving M. communis orally to rabbits improves their productive performance and minimizes the toxic effects of mycotoxins.