TITLE: Death-Leading Envenomization of Rabbits with Snake Versus Scorpion Venoms: A Comparative Forensic Investigation of Postmortem Decomposition and Beetle Succession.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/insects16060625
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/40559055

Background:Envenomation by poisonous creatures is a major global cause of mortality. Its concomitant impact on the postmortem corpse decomposition and associated insect succession pattern is still poorly understood. Purpose of the study: This study comparatively investigates the impact of envenomization with the venoms of the snake Walterinnesia aegyptia L. versus the scorpion, Androctonus crassicauda L., on rabbit corpse decomposition and beetle succession. Methods: Three groups of rabbits (five animals each) were injected with the snake venom, the scorpion venom, or 0.9% saline (control) prior to euthanasia with CO2. The corpse decomposition stages and beetle succession were monitored over 11 days. Results: Four stages of decomposition with venom-dependent duration variation were observed. The scorpion-envenomized corpses showed a longer decay stage and a delayed dry stage. A total of 1094 beetles belonging to 27 species of 14 families were reported. Histeridae, Dermestidae, Scarabaeidae, and Tenebrionidae were the most diversified and prevalent families. Chrysomelidae, Elateridae, Hybosoridae, and Ptinidae were incidentally attracted to control corpses, while Nitidulidae and Zopheridae were only found on control and snake-envenomized ones. Four species belonging to the families Anthicidae, Histeridae, Scarabaeidae, and Tenebrionidae were predominant on all corpses. Four species belonging to the families Chrysomelidae, Curculionidae, Elateridae, and Hybosoridae were distinctively associated with the control corpses. Conclusions: These findings provided evidence that envenomation impacted the decomposition process and beetle succession in a venom-dependent manner, which could be significant for forensic investigations.