TITLE: Early Osseous Proliferation in Spiraled Healing Chambers Resulted After the Insertion of Titanium Implants in Cortical Bone of a Rabbit.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/medicina62010072
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/41597358

Background and Objectives: The insertion of endosseous implants requires the alveolar bone to be drilled, which produces alterations of the osseous neoalveolus approximately 1 mm deep, an area that will later be subjected to osseous renewal. The healing of the bone around the inserted implant is complex and depends on numerous factors, amongst which the size of the insertion orifice relative to the diameter of the implant, the design, and the pace and depth of the threads play an essential part. Therefore, the aim of this paper is to investigate from a histologic point of view the osseointegration of the implants inserted in a rabbit cortical bone by creating a 150 µm high healing chamber. Materials and Methods: 5 mm-long and 2 mm-wide titan implants were inserted into the femur of 15 12-month-old rabbits by using a drill with a 1.8 mm diameter, obtaining a spiralled healing chamber 150 µm high. The animals were euthanized after 7, 14, and 28 days according to effective legal and ethical protocols. The bone around the implants was severed 5 µm thick. After coloring with the Tricrom Goldner method, the sections that intercepted most centrally the intervention area were examined and photographed with an Olympus microscope. Results: The histologic result showed osseous healing within the healing chamber in the third to the endosteum of the implant after 7 days from the insertion. After 14 days, the osseous healing spread to 2/3 of the healing chamber. After 28 days, the whole healing chamber was occupied by bone. Conclusions: The healing chamber favored proper conditions for osseous healing, which began at the level of the endosteum. This statement is based on the histologic findings of bone formation after 7 days only in the third of the endosteum of the healing chamber. A 150 µm height of the healing chamber obtained in the rabbit cortical bone does not pose a risk of connective tissue proliferation.