TITLE: Pathogenesis, Surgical Treatment and Postoperative Outcome of Rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus) With Intraabdominal Abscess: 12 Cases (2017-2023).
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1002/vms3.70506
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/40638540

BackgroundThe precise pathogenesis of intraabdominal abscess in pet rabbits remains unclear and descriptions of clinical findings are scant.ObjectivesThe objective of this retrospective study was to describe the clinical findings, possible pathogeneses and surgical treatments with long-term outcomes of rabbits presenting with intraabdominal abscess.MethodsMedical records of rabbits that underwent surgical excision and were diagnosed with intraabdominal abscess between 2017 and 2023 in a first-opinion hospital were retrospectively evaluated.ResultsMedical records were available for a total of 2128 rabbits, with 13 confirmed cases of intraabdominal abscess. Twelve cases considered eligible for this study were reviewed. Median age of the rabbits at onset was 18 months. Rabbits comprised 7 males (1 castrated) and 5 females (3 spayed), with 9 Lop-eared, 2 Netherland Dwarf and 1 Mini Rex. Common clinical signs were anorexia, decreased activity and abnormality of fecal production. Abdominal ultrasound and radiography revealed intraabdominal lesions in 12 and 7 cases, respectively. Exploratory laparotomy revealed intraabdominal abscess in all cases. Abscesses arose from the vermiform appendix in 6 cases and were associated with previous gastrointestinal perforation in 3 cases. The abscess was excised or incised with irrigation of the intraabscess cavity and administration of antibiotics. Nine cases showed an uneventful outcome (median survival time, 1044 days), including five cases showing growth of residual intraabdominal abscess.ConclusionsIntraabdominal abscess in rabbits is commonly associated from the vermiform appendix and previous gastrointestinal perforation. Surgical intervention for intraabdominal abscess along with antibiotic therapy appears effective.