TITLE: Network dynamics revealed from eDNA highlight seasonal variation in urban mammal communities.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1111/1365-2656.70082
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/40525513

Urban ecosystems are expanding rapidly, significantly altering natural landscapes and impacting biodiversity. Here we explore seasonal variation in mammal diversity using environmental DNA (eDNA) from soil samples collected during winter and summer across 21 urban parks in Detroit, Michigan. We estimated gamma (regional), alpha (local) and beta (compositional change) diversity to determine if seasonal shifts, reflecting winter scarcity and summer abundance in mammal community composition and human activity, could be detected using eDNA. We expected that larger parks would exhibit greater diversity and higher seasonal turnover, consistent with the species-area relationship (SAR) and hypothesised that increased summer resource availability would lead to decreased network density as species disperse more broadly. We found that urban parks show subtle, park-specific changes in community composition influenced by both ecological and anthropogenic factors, with species including striped skunk, brown rat and groundhog responsible for the observed seasonal variation. Consistent with the SAR, larger parks supported higher species richness and diversity. Ecological network analysis, focusing on metrics such as clustering coefficient and network density, revealed a decrease in the overall connectivity and cohesiveness of species interactions from winter to summer, supporting our hypothesis of broader species dispersal during resource-rich periods. Notably, human DNA was prevalent in all parks, alongside detections of pig and cow eDNA, potentially reflecting human disturbance and anthropogenic food inputs. Our findings underscore the efficacy of eDNA analysis in capturing urban mammal community dynamics, the impact of human activities on biodiversity and its potential as a valuable tool for urban ecological research. Ultimately, enhancing monitoring capacity aids in conservation and urban planning efforts that will promote human-wildlife coexistence and preserve the socio-ecological benefits stemming from biodiversity across cityscapes.