TITLE: Genome-wide identification of the H3K27ac signals reveals key thermogenic cis-regulatory elements of brown adipose tissues in Oryctolagus cuniculus.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s12864-025-11868-4
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/40713473

Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is a key thermogenic organ that regulates energy expenditure through non-shivering thermogenesis. Rabbits (Oryctolagus cuniculus) are economically important livestock animals and popular model animals for medical research. However, the epigenetic mechanisms underlying BAT function remain poorly understood. In this study, we performed genome-wide profiling of H3K27ac signals in BAT and white adipose tissue (WAT) of rabbits. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation with high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq), we identified 133,910 high-quality H3K27ac regions (peaks). The differential peaks between BATs and WATs were significantly enriched in thermogenesis-related functions and signaling pathways. An integrative analysis of H3K27ac, chromatin accessibility, and transcriptomic data identified potential strongly activated enhancers (SAEs) that regulate key thermogenic genes, including UCP1, PPARGC1A, and PDK4. The motifs of thermogenesis-related TF families, including NR, ETS, EBF, and MEF2, were significantly enriched by the distal H3K27ac regions of genes. Population resequencing data further revealed that variants within H3K27ac regions contribute to the differentiation of rabbit breeds. Comparative genomics analysis revealed 33,805 highly conserved enhancers between rabbits and humans. Notably, we discovered a potential BAT-specific enhancer RNA (eRNA) of PPARGC1A, which exhibited high chromatin accessibility and H3K27ac signals in BAT. Our findings provide a comprehensive catalog of cis-regulatory elements in rabbit adipose tissues, highlighting the critical role of conserved enhancers in regulating thermogenesis and adipose tissue plasticity, and may advance our understanding of the epigenetic regulation of BAT.