TITLE: Development of Propofol-Encapsulated Liposomes and the Effect of Intranasal Administration on Bioavailability in Rabbits.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/pharmaceutics17111446
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/41304784

Background/Objectives: Propofol is frequently used as an intravenous anesthetic and is rapidly metabolized. Therefore, if it could be administered non-invasively (e.g., orally) as premedication, it might hasten emergence from anesthesia, thereby improving patient safety. However, it undergoes extensive first-pass metabolism in the liver and intestines, limiting the route for premedication. We evaluated whether intranasal delivery of a propofol-encapsulated liposome solution improves systemic exposure and bioavailability in rabbits. Methods: A propofol-encapsulated liposome solution was administered to rabbits via the intravenous, oral, and intranasal routes. Blood propofol concentrations were measured for up to 60 min after administration and the area under the concentration-time curve (AUC0-60) and bioavailability of the propofol-encapsulated liposome solution were compared with those of the non-encapsulated propofol formulation. The differences were tested by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Šidák's post hoc multiple-comparisons test and the Mann-Whitney test (α = 0.05). Results: The AUC0-60 for blood propofol concentrations after intravenous administration was significantly higher with the propofol-encapsulated liposome solution than with the non-encapsulated propofol formulation (3038.8 ± 661.5 vs. 1929.8 ± 58.2 ng·min/mL; p = 0.0286). By contrast, no increase in blood propofol concentrations was observed after oral administration, whereas intranasal administration increased blood propofol concentrations and yielded significantly higher bioavailability compared with the non-encapsulated propofol formulation (16.4 ± 7.3% vs. 2.0 ± 1.2%; p = 0.0286). Conclusions: The findings of the present study suggest that intranasal liposomal propofol increased systemic availability compared with a non-encapsulated formulation, supporting further evaluation as a candidate premedication approach for propofol.