TITLE: Validation of the Monocyte Activation Test Demonstrating Equivalence to the Rabbit Pyrogen Test.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/ijms262211136
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/41303619

The Monocyte Activation Test (MAT) is an in vitro assay that uses human blood cells to detect both endotoxins and non-endotoxin pyrogens (NEPs), representing a scientifically and ethically superior alternative to the in vivo Rabbit Pyrogen Test (RPT). In the European Pharmacopoeia (Ph. Eur.), the MAT is a compendial method which is explicitly recommended to replace the RPT, requiring only product-specific verification. In contrast, the United States Pharmacopeia (USP) lacks a dedicated MAT chapter, meaning the MAT can only be accepted as an alternative method, given that a full method validation according to USP  is provided in addition to a product-specific verification. This study presents a two-tiered validation strategy addressing both regulatory frameworks: a generic (product-independent) validation aligned with the semi-quantitative test method according to Ph. Eur., ICH Q2, and USP  followed by a product-specific verification. The generic validation consisted of the following parameters: Range and Linearity, Limit of Detection, Accuracy, Specificity, Precision, and Robustness. Robustness was extensively tested under routine-relevant conditions, including variation in the stimulation time, IL-6 read-out timing, freeze-thaw stability, and lot-to-lot comparability. Additionally, an equivalency study of the RPT and the MAT was performed. The data showed that the MAT is at least non-inferior if not superior to the RPT and met the requirements for successful FDA approval of the MAT as an alternative method for pyrogen testing. The MAT was successfully applied to several parenteral drug products. This work provides a transferable framework for GMP-compliant MAT implementation and supports broader international acceptance of the method as a replacement for the RPT in pharmaceutical quality control.