TITLE: Efficacy of a Ceftazidime-loaded Nanofiber Insert in Treating <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>-induced Corneal Ulcers: An Animal Model.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.18502/jovr.v20.15595
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/41210492

PurposeThis study aimed to determine the efficacy of ceftazidime-containing nanofibers in treating corneal ulcers induced by the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa in an animal model.MethodsThis animal-assisted intervention involved 12 adult male New Zealand rabbits, each weighing between 3.5 and 4 kg. The animals were randomly assigned to two groups of six: an intervention group that received a ceftazidime nanofiber insert treatment and a control group that received no treatment. In the intervention group, the right eye was used as a test sample for ulcer induction and ceftazidime-loaded nanofiber examination, while the left eye served as a control to observe any inflammatory or irritating symptoms caused by the nanofiber in the absence of the active pharmaceutical compound. Examinations were performed daily, with slit lamp images taken on days 2, 4, 6, 9, 12, and 15. Clinical responses were recorded and graded according to a clinical examination table.ResultsPrior to the intervention, both groups exhibited a similar severity of corneal ulcers. After 48 hours, four of the six rabbits in the intervention group were positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa in their cultures, and the remaining two tested negative. Meanwhile, in the control group, three rabbits had positive cultures and three had negative cultures. After 96 hours from the onset of the treatment and the application of the ceftazidime nanofiber insert, three rabbits that initially presented with positive cultures exhibited negative cultures in the subsequent examinations; however, one rabbit still had positive smear and culture results. On day 9, the intervention group showed complete disappearance of infiltration and epithelial damage. However, the rabbit eyes in the control group demonstrated increased signs of involvement on days 6 and 9 compared to the previous examinations. Furthermore, the clinical results indicated a significant difference in the mean corneal ulcer scores between the two groups (P ConclusionGiven the observed effectiveness of the developed nanofiber in treating corneal ulcers induced by P. aeruginosa, this nanodrug delivery system has the potential to serve as a viable option for ocular drug delivery.