TITLE: Exosome-Seeded Cryogel Scaffolds for Extracellular Matrix Regeneration in the Repair of Articular Cartilage Defects: An In Vitro and In Vivo Rabbit Model Study.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/polym17070975
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/40219364

Traumatic or degenerative defects of articular cartilage impair joint function, and the treatment of articular cartilage damage remains a challenge. By mimicking the cartilage extracellular matrix (ECM), exosome-seeded cryogels may enhance cell proliferation and chondral repair. ECM-based cryogels were cryopolymerized with gelatin, chondroitin sulfate, and various concentrations (0%, 0.3%, 0.5%, and 1%) of hyaluronic acid (HA), and their water content, swelling ratio, porosity, mechanical properties, and effects on cell viability were evaluated. The regenerative effects of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cell (BM-MSC)-derived exosome (at a concentration of 106 particles/mL)-seeded 0.3% HA cryogels were assessed in vitro and in surgically induced male New Zealand rabbit cartilage defects in vivo. The water content, swelling ratio, and porosity of the cryogels significantly (p < 0.05) increased and the Young's modulus values of the cryogels decreased with increasing HA concentrations. MTT assays revealed that the developed biomaterials had no cytotoxic effects. The optimal cryogel composition was 0.3% HA, and the resulting cryogel had favorable properties and suitable mechanical strength. Exosomes alone and exosome-seeded cryogels promoted chondrocyte proliferation (with cell optical densities that were 58% and 51% greater than that of the control). The cryogel alone and the exosome-seeded cryogel facilitated ECM deposition and sulfated glycosaminoglycan synthesis. Although we observed cartilage repair via Alcian blue staining with both the cryogel alone and the exosome-seeded cryogel, the layered arrangement of the chondrocytes was superior to that of the control chondrocytes when exosome-seeded cryogels were used. This study revealed the potential value of using BM-MSC-derived exosome-seeded ECM-based cryogels for cartilage tissue engineering to treat cartilage injury.