TITLE: Collagen Analogs Promote Tissue Regeneration in HSV-1-Infected Corneas in Animal Models.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/jfb16100377
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/41149723

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is a leading cause of infectious corneal blindness worldwide. Human donor corneal transplantation remains the primary treatment for scarred corneas resulting from herpes simplex keratitis (HSK), a severe inflammatory corneal disease caused by HSV-1 infection, despite a high risk of re-infection or immune rejection of the allografts. As possible alternatives to donor grafting for HSK, we developed cell-free, regeneration-stimulating corneal implants designed to work even under adverse inflammatory situations such as severe infections. The implants comprised short, fully synthetic collagen-like peptides conjugated to polyethylene glycol (CLP-PEG) and crosslinked using carbodiimide chemistry. Being cell-free, they lacked the cellular targets that an already activated immune system would encounter in these inflamed corneas. We tested the performance of these implants in guinea pig and rabbit models of HSK. Three different HSV-1 strains were used to create experimental HSK in rabbits and guinea pigs. There were no overall statistically significant species differences or species-strain differences in virus-induced mortality. At three months post-operation, all treated corneas showed tissue regeneration, but with haze or neovascularization. The initially cell-free CLP-PEG implants allowed for repopulation by ingrowing cells to regenerate neocorneal tissue, despite the inflammation. However, they did not prevent HSV-1 reactivation nor re-infection, as neovascularization and disorganization were observed within the neocorneas. A detailed histopathological examination revealed viral strain differences, but only KOS infection showed interspecies neovascularization differences. A more detailed examination with larger numbers of animals is merited to fully elucidate the effects of the different viral strains on rabbits versus guinea pigs.