TITLE: Intra-Articular Administration of Ganglioside Sugars Protects Cartilage from Progressive Degeneration in an Instability OA Rabbit Model.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1177/19476035241311542
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/39810328

ObjectiveOsteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease that has no cure, and current therapies are intended to minimize pain. There is, therefore, a need for effective pharmacologic agents that reverse or slow the progression of joint damage. We report herein on an investigation of the effects of intra-articular injections of ganglioside sugars on the progression of OA in an experimental rabbit model.DesignKnee OA was induced Japanese in White rabbits by anterior cruciate ligament transection (ACLT). Ganglioside sugars at concentrations of 0.1, 0.3, and 0.9 mg/ml were then intra-articularly injected as a possible treatment for OA. Controls received intra-articular injections of saline. Knees were assessed macroscopically, histologically, and mechanically at 13 weeks after ACLT induction.ResultsMacroscopically, knees of the groups that received ganglioside sugars at concentrations of 0.3 and 0.9 mg/ml exhibited milder cartilage degradation compared to the controls. Consistent with these results, histological scores for these knees were significantly higher than the corresponding values for the control knees. Lectin histochemistry staining revealed that the treatment with ganglioside sugars at concentrations of 0.3 and 0.9 mg/ml was associated with a remarkable increase in the levels of GalNAc-positive chondrocytes in cartilage. Coefficient of friction testing also demonstrated that cartilages treated with ganglioside sugars had a lower coefficient of frictions than the values for the control group.ConclusionsIntra-articular injections of ganglioside sugars prevented cartilage degeneration in an OA-instability model. These results highlight the promising therapeutic potential for using ganglioside sugars in the treatment of progressive OA.