TITLE: Usefulness of Direct Auricular Artery Injection as Refinement of the Well-Established Rabbit Blood Shunt Subarachnoid Hemorrhage Model.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/brainsci15080826
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/40867155

IntroductionGiven the impact of aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage (aSAH) on patients' health, preclinical research is substantial to understand its pathophysiology and improve treatment strategies, which necessitates reliable and comprehensive animal models. Traditionally, aSAH models utilize iliac or subclavian access for angiography, requiring invasive procedures that are associated with significant risks and animal burden. This pilot study explores a less invasive method of digital subtraction angiography (DSA) by using the auricular artery (AA) as an alternative access point. Our aim was to demonstrate the feasibility of this refined technique, with the intention of reducing procedural risks, providing shorter operation times with enhanced neurological recovery, and simplifying the process for both researchers and animals.Materials and methodsIn this study, six female New Zealand white rabbits (3.2-4.1 kg body weight) underwent experimental induction of aSAH via a subclavian-cisternal shunt. The initial steps of this procedure followed traditional techniques, consisting of subclavian access through microsurgical preparation, followed by DSA to analyze retrograde filling of the basilar artery (BA). To evaluate the alternative method, on day 3 after induction of aSAH, DSA was performed via the AA instead of the traditional subclavian or femoral access. A catheter was placed in the AA to allow retrograde filling of the BA. This approach aimed to simplify the procedure while maintaining comparable imaging quality.ResultsAll rabbits survived until the study endpoint. Postoperatively, two rabbits showed signs of hemisyndrome, which significantly improved by the time of follow-up. No additional morbidities were observed. Upon euthanasia and necropsy, all animals showed clear subarachnoid bleeding patterns. DSA via the AA produced strong contrasting of the BA comparable to the traditional method.ConclusionsThis technical note presents an initial evaluation of AA access as a feasible and potentially advantageous method for DSA in a rabbit model of blood shunt subarachnoid hemorrhage. The method shows promise in reducing invasiveness and procedural complexity, but further studies are required to fully establish its efficacy and safety. Future research should focus on expanding the sample size, refining the anatomical understanding of the AA, and continuing to align with ethical considerations regarding animal welfare.