TITLE: Multislice CT-guided evaluation of collagen-chitosan composite in promoting antebrachiocarpal arthrodesis in a rabbit model.
YEAR: 2025
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1186/s13620-025-00307-1
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/40859361

BackgroundArthrodesis is a critical procedure for restoring stability and relieving pain in severely damaged joints. Successful bone fusion remains a significant challenge, often necessitating the use of biomaterials to enhance healing. Collagen and chitosan, two natural polymers with established biocompatibility and osteoconductive properties, have shown promise in regenerative medicine applications. The present study aimed to evaluate the synergistic effect of a collagen-chitosan composite on bone fusion of the antebrachiocarpal joint in a rabbit model. Multislice CT morphometrical analysis was utilized to assess bone healing and fusion, offering detailed insights into the material's efficacy in promoting joint stabilization and bone regeneration.Materials and methodsTwelve healthy male New Zealand White rabbits (4.0 ± 0.3 months old) with a mean body weight of 2.5 ± 0.5 kg were used. These animals underwent curettage of the articular cartilage down to the subchondral bone. The rabbits were then randomly assigned into two groups: a control group (C), in which no composite was applied, and a treatment group, in which collagen-chitosan scaffolds were utilized (Col/Cs). Joint fusion was postoperatively assessed using a multislice detector computed tomography (MSCT).Result(MSCT) revealed progressive enhancements in the collagen-chitosan (Col/Cs) group over 12 weeks. Radial cortical thickness and bone mineral density (BMD) were significantly higher at week 12 in the Col/Cs group (1.31 ± 0.10 mm vs. 1.03 ± 0.18 mm; p = 0.0086, and ~ 760 HU vs. ~510 HU; p = 0.0055, respectively). Intra-articular mineral density (IATMD) increased markedly at week 1 (p ConclusionThe results of the present study indicate that the collagen-chitosan composite enhances bone fusion and joint stability in a rabbit model of antebrachiocarpal arthrodesis, demonstrating both innovation and potential clinical applicability.