TITLE: A Systematic Review on Amnion as a Cell Delivery Scaffolding Material for Cartilage Regeneration in Pre-Clinical and Clinical Studies.
YEAR: 2026
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/bioengineering13030357
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/41899888

Cartilage is an important yet vulnerable tissue with limited self-healing capacity, where damage often progresses to joint degeneration, which eventually leads to severe osteoarthritis (OA). Current tissue engineering strategies focus on biocompatible scaffolds for cartilage regeneration, particularly amnion (or amniotic membrane), emerging as a promising biomaterial due to its wide availability, low immunogenicity, and naturally derived microenvironment that is advantageous for cartilage regeneration. This systematic review aims to evaluate the existing evidence on the efficacy of amnion as a tissue scaffolding material for cartilage regeneration in both preclinical and clinical studies. Using terms such as "cartilage damage", "cartilage injuries", "amnion" and "amniotic membrane", 19 relevant studies were identified across three major databases (PubMed, Scopus and Web of Science) until 25 December 2025. All preclinical and clinical studies that utilized amnion for cartilage repair or as cartilage tissue engineering scaffolding materials were included. Evidence quality was assessed using the OHAT and MINORS risk of bias tool. This study is prospectively registered in the PROSPERO database under the ID 1178444. The findings consistently indicate that amniotic scaffolds, regardless of processing methods or cell seeding, yield favorable outcomes without adverse effects across different species. In vitro analysis revealed that treatment groups with amnion show better cell attachment, viability, and proliferation, and higher content of cartilage-related markers expressed by the seeded cells, either chondrocyte, bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), adipose tissue-derived MSCs, placenta-derived MSCs, umbilical cord-derived MSCs, amniotic MSCs or amniotic epithelial cells. In in vivo and ex vivo studies, amnion-treated groups demonstrated improved quality of the treated cartilage, with better integration, as indicated by higher histological scores and the presence of type II collagen (COL-II). There was an inconsistency in the reporting of cartilage defect dimensions in the in vivo models across the different studies. Nevertheless, the outcome measurements were consistently reported with histological analysis, with or without International Cartilage Repair Society (ICRS) scoring and immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis, across the studies. Clinically, most subjects show improvement in the Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS) Sports and Recreation score and KOOS Quality of Life score, as well as reduced Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) average and maximum pain scores. In conclusion, preclinical and clinical studies support amnion as an ideal scaffold material for cartilage tissue engineering and regeneration. Future research should focus on optimizing and standardizing amnion scaffold preparation at a production scale to facilitate the translation of these positive outcomes into clinical applications. This study is funded by the Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia via Prototype Research Grant Scheme (PRGS/1/2021/SKK01/UM/02/1) and UM International Collaboration Grant-2023 SATU Joint Research Scheme Program: ST007-2024.