TITLE: Long-Term Tolerability and Safety of AAV5-Id3 Gene Therapy to Eyes.
YEAR: 2026
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1167/tvst.15.1.38
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/41603714

PurposeThe inhibitor of differentiation 3 gene therapy via adeno-associated virus 5 (AAV5-Id3) effectively abrogated corneal fibrosis in vivo. This study examined the long-term tolerability and safety of AAV5-Id3 gene therapy for eyes in vivo using a rabbit model.MethodsEighteen New Zealand White rabbits, segregated into three groups (naive, AAV5-naked, and AAV5-Id3; n = 6/group), were used. The clinical eye examinations with slit-lamp and multimodal corneal imaging were performed in live rabbits periodically to record the status of ocular and corneal health for up to 7 months. Thereafter, humane euthanasia was performed, and cellular and molecular changes in corneas were studied employing histopathologic, immunofluorescence, and quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) techniques.ResultsPeriodic masked eye examinations with slit-lamp, Spectralis, HRT3-RCM, and specular ophthalmic microscopes found no significant differences in the corneas of naive, AAV5-naked, and AAV5-Id3 groups. Modified McDonald-Shadduck scores revealed no signs of blepharospasm, chemosis, abnormal discharge, epiphora, erythema, or epithelial abrasion in three groups. Pachymetry, tonometry, and fluorescein testing detected no alterations in corneal thickness, intraocular pressure, and tear volume in eyes of the three groups. Histopathologic studies revealed corneal architecture, cellular organization, cellular morphology, and collagen levels similar in eyes of the three groups. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis did not find changes in nuclear factor κB, tumor necrosis factor α, α-smooth muscle actin, fibronectin, vascular endothelial growth factor, and pigment epithelium-derived factor messenger RNA levels in three test groups. At 7 months, AAV5-Id3 corneas had 2.73 × 102 ± 0.34 delivered-Id3 gene copies.ConclusionsTargeted topical AAV5-Id3 gene therapy is tolerable, safe, and nontoxic to the eyes in vivo.Translational relevanceTopical AAV5-Id3 gene therapy treats corneal fibrosis without significant side effects in vivo.