TITLE: Effects of gold nanoparticles and apricot seeds on bone healing in New Zealand rabbits.
YEAR: 2026
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1016/j.jtumed.2025.11.006
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/41585602

ObjectivesSuboptimal osseointegration of implant materials is linked to oxidative stress and compromised bone regeneration. Gold nanoparticles (Au NPs) function as anti-inflammatory and osteogenic agents, promoting bone growth by reducing cell damage and enhancing cellular activity. Apricot seeds contain amygdalin, a natural antioxidant and osteogenic substance. This study aimed to evaluate the impacts of Au NPs and apricot seed extract on bone healing in a rabbit model.MethodsTwelve adult male New Zealand white rabbits were assigned to three groups: untreated (control), Au NPs treated, and apricot seed treated groups. Six holes were surgically drilled in the tibiae (right/left) of each animal. Each hole was injected with 0.3 mL of Au NPs or apricot seed liquid extract. Histological analysis was performed after 7 and 14 days of healing using hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained bone samples, which were cut around the holes in all test animals. Light microscopy and S-EYE 2.0 software were used to count blood vessels, osteoblasts, osteocytes, and bone marrow spaces.ResultsLocal application of apricot seeds and Au NPs decreased vascularization and bone marrow spaces, and stimulated bone-forming cells, where Au NPs were more effective. Treatment with Au NPs significantly lowered the number of blood vessels after 14 days to the smallest value (2.6 ± 0.96) recorded under all treatments. By day 14, the numbers of osteoblasts (45.1 ± 4.36) and osteocytes (60.0 ± 7.71) were significantly higher under treatment by Au NPs compared with the control.ConclusionAu NPs and the natural agent apricot seed extract enhanced osteoblasts and osteocytes in a rabbit model, and could potentially promote bone regeneration. However, these observations should be interpreted cautiously considering the limitations of this study, such as its retrospective design and single-center sample. These findings are an essential preliminary clinical step required to justify future human studies.