TITLE: Effect of Moringa oleifera leaf extract gel on pulp repair following pulpotomy: an in-vivo study.
YEAR: 2026
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.1038/s41598-026-41452-z
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/41882148

Moringa oleifera (MO) is an herbal agent that has antimicrobial, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory properties. It may promote reparative dentin formation and resolute pulpal inflammation. However, limited researches have shown their influence on pulpal inflammation. Thus, this study investigated the histological response of the pulp after using of MO in pulpotomy of rabbit's incisors. For this investigation, twelve adult male New Zealand white rabbits with a total of 48 teeth-two upper and two lower central incisors-were chosen. On the cervical third of the incisors' labial surface, class V cavities were created. 5 µL of Escherichia coli (E. coli) lipopolysaccharide O111:B4 at a dosage of 10 mg/mL was used to cause pulpitis following pulp exposure. Glass ionomer was then used to seal the cavities. The pulp was reaccessed and a pulpotomy was carried out following a 24-h period of pulpitis induction. Based on the pulpotomy agent employed, the cavities were randomized into three groups (16 teeth each): group I received white mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) as a positive control, group II received nothing (negative control), and group III received 15% MO leaf extract gel. To assess pulpal inflammation and repair processes, a histological study was conducted 2 weeks following pulpotomy. A statistical analysis of the data was conducted. Comparing 15% MO leaf extract gel to control groups, there was a statistically significant decrease in the inflammatory cells infiltration and the disorganization of pulp tissue (P = 0.000). The 15% MO leaf extract gel and MTA did not significantly differ in terms of reparative dentin development. In contrast to the negative control, both groups displayed a statistically significant difference (P = 0.000). Using 15% MO leaf extract gel as a pulpotomy agent results in almost similar new hard tissue formation and less inflammation and pulpal tissue disorganization when compared to white MTA.