TITLE: Therapeutically Induced Modulation of Collagen I-to-III Ratio Three Weeks After Rabbit Achilles Tendon Full Transection.
YEAR: 2026
JOURNAL: 
DOI: 10.3390/biology15020204
SOURCE: EuropePMC/MED/41594940

During tendon healing, collagen III expression precedes that of collagen I. The collagen I-to-III ratio at a certain time point post-laceration serves as an indicator of the healing status. Consequently, it is crucial to understand how different therapeutic approaches to support tendon healing affect the collagen I-to-III ratio in the extracellular matrix of a healing tendon, particularly across distinct anatomical zones. We compared the impact of a platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) treatment via controlled release from coaxially electrospun DegraPol® (Ab medica, Cerro Maggiore, Italy) hollow-fiber mesh with a treatment by the vehicle alone (no PDGF-BB) in the rabbit Achilles tendon full transection model and provide data on the collagen I-to-III ratio 3 weeks post-operation. For this purpose, we compared a dual-color Herovici staining to two single IHC labeling, for collagen I and collagen III, respectively. Herovici staining (HV) was expected to offer a more precise approach (pink-to-blue histogram) than the two separately labeled IHC stainings, both with chromogenic DAB labeling (red-to-green histogram), despite an anticipated positive correlation of the data assessed by these methods. Different zones were compared, i.e., native tendon tissue, reactive zone at interface to implant, hot zone within the core of the healing tendon and the zone within the scaffold, meaning the collagen deposited within the fibers of the implanted DegraPol® tube, respectively. The analysis revealed that the ratios obtained via HV correlated weakly with the ratios obtained by IHC. Based on HV, PDGF-BB therapy led to higher collagen I-to-III ratios in all zones, except for the zone within the scaffold pores, while IHC did not reveal significant differences. Notably, collagen I-to-III ratios were not higher in immediate proximity, but rather distal from the PDGF-BB releasing implant, specifically in the core of the healing tendon tissue. Hence, a PDGF-BB therapy is suggestive of greater collagen maturation in specific zones of the healing tendon.